<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM
"http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>Convict Life at the Minnesota State Prison, Stillwater, Minnesota</title>
<author><name reg="Heilbron, William">William Heilbron</name></author>
</titleStmt>
<editionStmt>
<edition n="10">
Edition 10
</edition>
</editionStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<date value="2015-02-08">February 8, 2015</date>
<idno type="etext-no">48208</idno>
<availability>
<p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
at no cost and
with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may
copy it, give it
away or re-use it under the terms of the
Project Gutenberg
License online at
www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
</availability>
</publicationStmt>

 <sourceDesc>
  <bibl>
  <title>Convict Life at the Minnesota State Prison, Stillwater, Minnesotan</title>
  <author>William Heilbron</author>
  <imprint>
   <pubPlace>Saint Paul, Minnesota</pubPlace>
   <publisher>W. C. Heilbron</publisher>
   <date>1909</date>
  </imprint>
  </bibl>
 </sourceDesc>

</fileDesc>

<encodingDesc>
<classDecl>
<taxonomy id="lc">
<bibl>
<title>Library of Congress
Classification</title>
</bibl>
</taxonomy>
</classDecl>
</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
<langUsage>
 <language id="en"></language>
 <language id="fr"></language>
 <language id="es"></language>
 <language id="la"></language>
 <language id="el"></language>
 <language id="nl"></language>
 <language id="de"></language>
 <language id="it"></language>
 <language id="tk"></language>
 <language id="ru"></language>
</langUsage>
<textClass>
<classCode scheme="lc">PR</classCode>
<keywords>
<list>
<item>Prisons--Minnesota.</item>
</list>
</keywords>
</textClass>

</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
<change>
<date value="2015-02-08">February 8, 2015</date>
<respStmt><name>Martin Schub</name></respStmt>
<item>Project Gutenberg edition 10</item>
</change>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w80             { }
    .w70             { }
    .w60             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w40             { }
    .w30             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w10             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w80             { width: 80% }
      .w70             { width: 70% }
      .w60             { width: 60% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w40             { width: 40% }
      .w30             { width: 30% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w10             { width: 10% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">

<front>
<div>
  <divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>
<div>
  <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
</div>


<titlePage rend="page-break-before: right; text-align: center">
 <docTitle><titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: x-large">CONVICT LIFE AT THE MINNESOTA STATE PRISON<lb />
STILLWATER, MINNESOTA <lb />
Profusely Illustrated<lb /><lb /><lb /><lb /><lb /><lb /><lb /><lb />
 </titlePart>
</docTitle>

<figure url="images/titledec.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w30">
<head></head>
<figDesc>title page decoration</figDesc>
</figure>

 <byline>By <docAuthor>W. C. Heilbron<lb /></docAuthor></byline>

<docEdition>Second Edition 1,000 Copies<lb /><lb /></docEdition>

<docImprint>W. C. HEILBRON <lb />
104 Dispatch Bldg.<lb />ST. PAUL, MINN.<lb />
PRESS OF MURPHY-TRAVIS CO., MINNEAPOLIS<lb /> </docImprint>
<docDate>1909</docDate>
</titlePage>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>Preparer's Note</head>
<p>
Typographical errors have been retained in this text.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>PREFACE </head>
<p>
Few people have a comprehensive idea of a penitentiary, especially the daily life of the inmates and 
the routine work in connection therewith. We 
will endeavor to give an accurate account of the prisoner's mode of occupation, his ideals, hopes and aspirations and follow him from the day he entered the prison, 
from his initiation into the various departments, to the 
day of his final discharge. 
One of our celebrated poets has truly said: 
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<lg>
<l>A prison is a house of care, </l>
<l>A place where few can thrive, </l>
<l>A touchstone true to try a friend, </l>
<l>But a grave to one alive.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This stanza sums up the situation very nicely, although 
prison life is not the horrible nightmare that many authors have depicted. Most writers seem to get their ideas 
from the comic papers, wherein the prisoner is absurdly 
cartooned with close-cropped hair, low-browed and villainous looks, dressed in striped clothing of grotesque fit, 
and in many cases he is pictured chained to the floor by 
a huge ball and chain. This may have been an authentic 
description of the average prisoner years ago, but is 
not true today. It is a far cry from the time when Diogenes walked the streets of ancient Athens with a lighted 
lantern in the day time looking for an honest man. There 
were no prisons at that period of the world's history. If 
a man committed a serious crime against the state or 
<pb n="4" />
an individual the authorities ordered the lictor to strike 
off his head. If the offense was a minor one the offender 
was sold into slavery. This mode of procedure required 
only a few moments to execute, for in those days there 
were no protracted trials or clever attorneys to seek technicalities through which to free their clients. This condition of affairs prevailed for many centuries, and it often
happened that a greater injustice was done the wrongdoer 
than he had committed against the state. 
</p>
<p>
Fortunately, however, it remained for Victor Hugo 
to cry a halt against the then inhuman treatment accorded 
prisoners. In <q>Les Miserables</q> he paints a vivid picture that profoundly awakened public conscience, which 
still causes the world to shudder as it thinks of the injustice society did to poor Jean Valjean for stealing two 
loaves of bread to keep from starving. 
</p>
<p>
There is today a more broad, more tolerant and a decidedly more civilized sentiment towards the inmates 
of penal institutions. It is universally recognized that 
the prisoner of today becomes the citizen of tomorrow; 
this fact must be conceded. Every effort is, therefore, 
made to assist them who have a keen desire to lead an 
honest life. However, if one is inclined to go around 
with a <q>chip on his shoulder,</q> so to speak, he will undoubtedly find as much trouble inside as he will outside 
of a prison. If he behaves himself, complies with the 
rules and performs his work in a conscientious manner 
he will have no more difficulty than he would anywhere 
else. 
</p>
<p>
Modern penology has many bright laurels to its credit. 
What is meant by <q>modern penology</q> is that era which 
ushered in the good-time law, whereby a prisoner is enabled by meritorious conduct to reduce his original  
<pb n="5" />
sentence to a marked degree; the parole and grading system, 
which permits the release of a first offender at the expiration of half his sentence; the establishing of prison 
night schools, enabling him to learn a trade during imprisonment and permitting him to have books, papers, 
magazines, etc. In fact our modern penology, of which 
a striking example can be seen in the Minnesota State 
Prison, that has the reputation of being one of the 
best-managed institutions in the country, aims to develop 
the good in the prisoner instead of continually keeping 
at a white heat all his coarse and brutal instincts. 
</p>
<p>
Many years ago (and in some prisons at the present 
time), harsh measures were employed to punish an inmate for the slightest violation of a prison rule. But 
experience vividly impressed upon the public mind that 
such policy was a vicious one. It returned the prisoner 
to society a hundred fold more dangerous than he was 
previous to his commitment. Moral suasion has now 
supplanted the loaded cane, the dungeon and all other 
drastic, coercive measures which, instead of improving, 
had a decided tendency to make idiots of prisoners, 
morally, mentally and physically. It is dangerous 
to permit a mad dog to roam at large, and the same 
is true of the prisoner whom the custodians of the 
state turn loose on the community, whose every fibre 
beats stridently for revenge upon those who have subjected him to brutal treatment. Roughly speaking, we 
feel safe in saying that seventy-five per cent of the prisoners are susceptible to moral suasion and any appeal 
made to them is taken seriously. 
</p>
<p>
Our modern penology is not the effervescent dream of 
unbalanced minds, but the result of exhaustive research 
by many of the best prison authorities in America and 
<pb n="6" />
Europe. Long experience has proven its value, and the 
present century will assuredly witness as many wonderful improvements as took place in the past. 
</p>
<p>
For various reasons I have refrained from mentioning 
the names of prisoners with sensational reputations who 
have been inmates of the Minnesota State Prison in the 
past. 
</p>
<p>
I am sincerely indebted to Warden Wolfer, his employees, and many inmates of the prison, for their cooperation in assisting me to present the following pages 
to the public, without which this book would be impossible. 
</p>
<signed>W. C. Heilbron.</signed>
<dateline>St. Paul, June 20, 1909. </dateline>
</div>

</front>

<body>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MINNESOTA STATE PRISON</head>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE PRISONER'S RECEPTION AT THE PENITENTIARY </head>
<pb n="7" />
<p>
An incoming prisoner is designated by the inmates 
as a <q>fresh fish.</q> He enters the administration building, and, as a rule, if he has the reputation of being 
a <q>slippery chap</q> is handcuffed to the sheriff or one 
of his deputies. Handcuffs, in the vernacular of the 
underground world, are called <q>come-a-longs.</q> He 
now enters a room known as <q>between the gates.</q> (One 
of these gates leads to the outer world and the other 
to the inside of the prison.) Here the prisoner's commitment papers are examined, the deputy warden sent 
for to receive the new arrival, and slips are immediately 
made out notifying the several heads of departments of 
the man's name, county from which he came, the offense 
for which he was committed and the time that he shall 
serve. 
</p>
<p>
Upon the arrival of the deputy warden the prisoner is 
taken in charge and marched through the officers' barber 
shop and kitchen.  Upon leaving the latter room the 
<q>fresh fish</q> is commanded to <q>turn to the right,</q> and a 
short distance ahead, about twenty feet, he is told to 
'<q>turn to the left.</q> He now enters the large cellhouse&mdash;his future home, to remain for the number of years that 
His Honor, the Judge of the District Court, has sentenced him to serve. The cellhouse contains 664 cells 
(referring to Minnesota's institution, which furnishes the 
<pb n="8" />
nucleus for this article) and is in charge of an officer 
known as the Captain of the Cellhouse. 
</p>
<p>
This officer now takes the new arrival in charge and 
searches his person thoroughly, empties his pockets of 
everything they contain, and takes his coat, hat and vest. 
Any valuables found on him, such as money, jewelry, 
trinkets, tobacco, etc., are immediately tied up into a 
bundle and sent to the deputy warden's office. A duplicate receipt is made out for all articles of intrinsic value, 
is signed by the Captain of the Cellhouse and also by 
the new arrival so as to insure their safe keeping until 
the day of his release. 
</p>
<p>
The next move, and one that is a decisive reminder of 
his future status in the world, is to the bath room, where 
he takes a bath and puts on a <q>second-grade</q> uniform, 
there being three grades in all. The first is the highest. 
Its garb consists of a neat grey suit and cap. First grade 
prisoners are entitled to write one letter each week, to 
draw a ration (four ounces) of tobacco weekly, and to receive visitors once in four weeks. They have a dining 
room to themselves and are served with a greater variety 
of food than are the prisoners in the other grades. They 
have also such other privileges granted them from time 
to time as their general conduct warrants. 
</p>
<p>
Prisoners in the second grade are clothed in a black 
and grey check suit and cap. They are permitted to
write one letter a fortnight, to draw a ration of tobacco 
weekly and to see visitors once a month. They also have 
a dining room of their own, but the food served therein is 
not as varied as that served to first grade men. The latter, for example, are served with butter and other relishes 
at stated intervals, but such things are not part of the diet 
of the second grade prisoners. 
</p>

<figure url="images/adminofc.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Administration Office </head>
<figDesc>Administration Office </figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/betwgate.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Between the Gates </head>
<figDesc>Between the Gates </figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/grades.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Group Showing the Three Grades of Prisoners</head>
<figDesc>Group Showing the Three Grades of Prisoners</figDesc>
</figure>

<pb n="9" />
<pb n="10" />
<pb n="11" />
<p>
Inmates in the third grade wear black and white striped 
suits. They are denied tobacco, writing and visiting privileges and their meals are served in their cells, which are 
located in one portion of the cellhouse. In none of the 
grades are prisoners required to march with the <q>lock-step,</q> and excepting those in the third grade, all are permitted to wear their hair long enough to comb during 
good behavior. The prisoner, after his bath, is again 
brought into the cellhouse and the captain has one of the 
inmate barbers clip his hair and shave him. If the new 
arrival belongs to the respectable class, wearing a mustache and dressed well he will hardly recognize himself 
if he should chance to look into a mirror. In a few 
moments the proud American citizen has been supplanted 
by the convict. Those who belong to the so-called <q>criminal</q> class are not affected upon donning the prison uniform, but it is different with the first offender. If he 
is a proud, sensitive man the change is great enough to 
almost wrench his heart strings asunder. Many a new 
arrival, spending his first night in his cell, with its iron 
bed, whitewashed walls, scant furnishings, iron floor and 
the dimensions of the room only five by seven feet, has 
been known to break down completely. After such an 
ordeal (not your make-believe imprisonment, where some 
author has himself locked up for an hour or so to gain 
local coloring for a novel) one gets a clear idea of what 
prison life really is and places a higher valuation on the 
liberty that he so recklessly trampled under foot in his 
mad rush for riches, position and fame. 
</p>
<p>
After the tonsorial artist has completed his task the 
prisoner is conducted to the deputy warden's office, where 
he is weighed, asked innumerable questions, etc., instructed as to the rules of the institution, measured according 
<pb n="12" />
to the Bertillon system, which is the standard adopted in 
this country and throughout Europe. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">BERTILLON MEASUREMENTS </head>
<p>
To Dr. Alphonse Bertillon, the celebrated French anthropologist, the world is indebted for the knowledge of 
the scientifically demonstrated fact that no two persons 
are exactly alike in physical measurements. In fact any 
single individual can be identified from thousands of 
others by this cleverly thought-out system, which was 
first adopted in this country in 1887. The accompanying 
illustrations are self-explanatory. 
</p>
<p>
The system embraces three distinct parts: First, the 
measurement of certain unchangeable <q>bony lengths</q> of 
the body; second, a careful description of the features 
of the face; third, a careful localization of all scars and 
marks on the body. While the face may change, be 
even mutilated beyond recognition; while the scars and 
other marks may be removed, the <q>bony lengths</q> of the 
body remain unchangeable in adults. The parts measured of the bony lengths of the body are the length and 
width of the head, the cheek width, length of foot, the 
middle and little finger and the cubit, i. e., from the 
elbow to the tip of the little finger; the height standing, 
the height seated, the reach of outstretched arms, right 
ear length (which most authorities assert remains the 
same through life), the median line in front from the 
fork or hollow below the <q>Adam's apple</q> down, and, in 
the rear, the spinal column from the seventh vertebra to 
the base of the spine, are the anatomical or <q>guiding 
<pb n="13" />
points</q> from which all descriptions of the body are recorded; in the fingers, the joints and flanges,&mdash;the flanges 
being the portions of the fingers between the joints. The 
calipers for measuring the head are provided with a 
graduated arch and are similar to a compass. In taking 
the length of the head the left point of the caliper is 
held at the root of the nose and the right point is brought 
against the occipital bone in the back of the head; the 
thumb screw is then tightened and the measurement 
checked by passing the instrument again over the head. 
The width of the head over the cheeks is taken in the 
same way. The measurement of the foot is taken with a 
caliper rule similar to that used by a shoemaker; the 
prisoner is posed standing on his left foot and steadying 
himself as shown in the illustration. The graduate stem 
is placed against the inside of the foot with the fixed arm 
in contact with the heel and the sliding arm then brought 
in tightly against the toe. In measuring the left middle 
<pb n="14"/>
and little finger the back of the caliper rule is used, two 
small projections being provided on the fixed and sliding arms. The finger is bent at right angles to the back
of the hand and the measurement taken from the tip of 
the finger to the knuckle.
</p>

<figure url="images/headleng.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Head Length Measurements.</head>
<figDesc>Head Length Measurements.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
The registering and record made of the foregoing, 
together with an accurate description of the face and all 
marks on the body, constitute the third and complete 
part of this system. To illustrate this part briefly,&mdash; 
measurements are all based on the French metric system, viz: Height, 1 metre, 71 centimetres, 3 millimitres;
<pb n="15" />
width, 14 centimetres, 5 millimetres; length of right 
ear, 6 centimeters, 3 millimetres; length of foot, 2.62; 
length of middle finger, 11.7; length of little finger, 7.1; 
length of forearm, 46.3. A metre is 39 inches, a centimetre about 3/8ths of an inch and a millimetre, 1-25th of 
an inch. 
</p>

<figure url="images/armmeas.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Measurements of Outstretched Arms and Left Foot.</head>
<figDesc>Measurements of Outstretched Arms and Left Foot.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/fingmeas.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Left Middle Finger Measurement.</head>
<figDesc>Left Middle Finger Measurement.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
The description of heads range in 14 (head) classes, 
being reckoned from A to Z. The middle fingers have 
three classes; forearm, three classes; height, three classes, 
and the little finger, three classes. Only one millimetre 
or 1-25th of an inch is allowed as the difference between 
the measurements of any two operators of the Bertillon 
system in the <q>bony lengths</q> of the body. This is so 
infinitesimal that a measurement taken in France, England, the United States or in Russia by different operators will discover the prisoner, no matter where he may 
be, and there is no escape unless it be the grave. 
</p>
<p>
The technical terms used in the description of scars or 
marks are strictly medical. For instance, if a man has 
a scar on his left breast it is described as recitilnal, vertical, horizontal, inal&mdash;such a distance from the median 
<pb n="16" />
line, and to the right, left, above or below the nipple. 
Scars on the fingers are described in the same terms, 
indicating the flange and joint, and so on through all 
parts of the body,&mdash;every mark, cut or bruise being measured in front, from the median line, and in the rear, from 
the spinal column, as stated. 
</p>
<p>
With reference to the ears, there are certain external 
features by which scientists assert criminals may be instantly detected. Have you a criminal ear? Dr. D. S. 
Lamb, at one time curator in charge of the Army Medical
Museum, says there is such a thing as a <q>criminal 
ear.</q> Anthropologists have been giving a great deal of 
study to this matter of late, and their data points to the 
conclusion that the term <q>ear-mark</q> is something more 
than a mere figure of speech. No one has two ears just 
alike; all ears are faulty in one way or another, that is, 
as to size, shape or position, and these organs do not stop 
growing when the body pauses in its development. At 
<pb n="17" />
all events, chronic malefactors are apt to be disfigured by 
certain malformations of that organ. It has been proven 
that abnormalities in the ear structure are characteristic 
features of degenerates. Such abnormalities are commonly found in idiots, imbeciles and epileptics, and the prisons contain quite a number of inmates with such ears. 
The sloping ear is bad; it shows a tendency to reversion 
to the primitive animal ear which slopes. The great Napoleon, Lord Byron, Henry Clay and Alexander Hamilton had sloping ears. Another objectionable type is the 
<q>wing ear,</q> which projects wing-like from the head. This 
type of ear is said to indicate a tendency towards degeneracy; are found in one individual out of every five among 
sane persons, in two out of five among the insane and in 
three out of every five in criminals, occurring twice as 
often among men as among women. 
</p>

<figure url="images/ears.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Criminal Ear.</head>
<figDesc>Criminal Ear.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/eartrunk.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Right Ear and Trunk Measurements.</head>
<figDesc>Right Ear and Trunk Measurements.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
Considering all available data, it appears that ape-like 
traits, monkey-ancestry being commonly exhibited, are 
found far less frequently in the ears of women than in 
men. This fact would seem to prove that our female 
race has progressed the farthest from the ancestral type. 
By carefully feeling with the thumb inside of the edge 
<pb n="18" />
of the ear and a little behind the top a very small lump 
of cartilage will be found, as if a foreign body had become imbedded in the tissue. This is a remnant of what 
was originally the tip of the ear, when hundreds of thousands of years ago that organ in our remote ancestors 
had a point on it. Among men of note,&mdash;statesmen, scientists, politicians, etc., it occurs less frequently by about 
ten per cent. The so-called <q>Darwinian tubercle</q> appears, as stated, less frequently in women than in men, 
and is unmistakably a trait reverting to the ape. Certain 
it is that no part of the body can be identified with greater accuracy than by the ears. Your own, for example, 
are not matched exactly by any other pair in the world; 
there are differences which are shown beyond the possibility of mistake, by careful measurements, as applied in 
the Bertillon system. In nine out of every ten persons 
the ear-lobe runs into the flesh of the cheek without any 
perceptible division between. Experts term this the <q>confluent lobule,</q> and it also is found more often in women 
than in men. It is said to occur in 92 per cent of the 
sane and in 47 per cent of the insane. The most remarkable feature in regard to the criminal ear, if it can 
be so called, is the prominence of the raised area just 
inside the outer edge, the outer edge being termed the 
<q>helix</q> and the part referred to the <q>anti-helix.</q> It appears that the overdevelopment of this portion of the 
aural structure is particularly characteristic of criminals. 
</p>
<p>
A student of this subject can tell a person's age more 
accurately by observation of the ears than by any other 
way. Even women, who, in other respects, preserve the 
youthfulness of their appearance to an advanced period 
are apt to betray their maturity through this organ, 
which acquires a sharp definition of contour, a tiny wrinkle
<pb n="19" />
appearing just in front of it. Some people are able 
to wag their ears slightly,&mdash;another indication of primeval animal traits: Our remote ancestors unquestionably 
wagged their ears, and every human being today is provided with ear-wagging muscles. In most individuals, 
however, these muscles have become so far rudimentary 
that they are useless for wagging purposes. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE FINGER PRINT SYSTEM</head>
<p>
Our new arrival is still in the hands of the record 
officer; his next introduction is to what is known as the 
<q>finger-print</q> system, which method has but recently 
been inaugurated at the Minnesota State Prison. All 
prisoners are at first compelled to have <q>photos</q> taken 
of the balls of their fingers, the procedure being very 
simple. The recording officer has an inking-stone and 
brayer similar to those used in a print shop for <q>pulling</q> 
proofs. He inks the stone, grasps the outstretched finger 
of the new arrival, the underside or ball of his finger 
rolled a full turn on the stone, and then given a similar 
roll on paper blanks provided for that purpose, which 
are filed away in a cabinet with the Bertillon records for 
future reference. These blanks are frequently consulted 
for the purpose of identifying escaped or suspected offenders. 
</p>
<p>
The finger-print system was invented by the Chinese 
thousands of years ago, and is considered to be the 
safest method yet discovered for correct identification 
purposes. Today it is being extensively used in this 
country and in Europe. The United States Government 
has a perfectly organized bureau in operation in
<pb n="20" />
conjunction with its federal and military prisons. Hundreds of thousands of thumb prints have been made, but 
no two have yet been found exactly alike. 
</p>
<p>
The impetus given to the system in this country is perhaps due to Mark Twain, America's famous humorist, 
author, publisher, printer and lecturer. In <q>Puddenhead 
Wilson</q> Mr. Clemens has the village dunce riding a 
<q>hobby</q> at full tilt and that hobby was the taking of 
finger impressions. The citizens considered him a weak-minded fool, but to humor him they allowed impressions 
of the balls of their fingers to be taken. The names of 
their owners were recorded and then carefully filed away. 
Finally Puddenhead Wilson proved himself to be anything but a fool, for when a mysterious murder was committed in the village he apprehended the perpetrator of 
the crime, his sole clue being the bloody imprints of the 
murderer's fingers found on the woodwork in the room 
where the crime was committed. The finger-print system, since the advent of Mr. Clemens' book, has sprung 
into vogue in all parts of the country. 
</p>
<p>
There are to date several authentic cases on record 
where by means of this new method of identification 
prisoners were acquitted, notwithstanding the fact that 
circumstantial evidence in the hands of the prosecuting 
attorney was overwhelmingly against the accused. One 
case was that of a man who had broken his parole from 
a penitentiary. While absolutely innocent, he was arrested and charged with having committed a certain 
crime. He could offer no proof without divulging the 
fact that he had violated his parole, (he still had about 
two years to serve), but realizing that he was about to 
be sentenced for eight or ten years on the present charge, 
he chose the lesser of the two evils and informed the
<pb n="21" />
<pb n="22" />
<pb n="23" />
authorities of his identity. Investigation disclosed the fact 
that he had not been released from the penitentiary when 
the alleged crime was committed. This incident demonstrates conclusively that the finger-print system not only 
detects the wrongdoer, but greatly assists in preventing 
a miscarriage of justice. 
</p>

<figure url="images/visitors.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Visitor's Reception Room </head>
<figDesc>Visitor's Reception Room </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/govenors.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Governor's Room </head>
<figDesc>Governor's Room </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/boardrm.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Board of Control's Room, where Monthly Meetings are Held</head>
<figDesc>Board of Control's Room, where Monthly Meetings are Held</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
After the operation of taking the new arrival's finger-imprints is completed, and instructions are given as to 
prison discipline, etc., the incoming prisoner is sent to the 
medical department, where he is given a thorough physical examination, and if he is affected with any disease 
it is noted in a book kept expressly for that purpose. If 
he needs medical attention he is told to come up to the 
<q>sick-call</q> in the forenoon at nine o'clock. All ailing 
prisoners can attend this call each morning. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE PRISONER IS ASSIGNED WORK</head>
<p>
By this time the new arrival is, in all probability, wondering what will happen next, but he is soon enlightened. 
Work in one of the various departments will be assigned 
him, for instance, presuming that the shop where he is 
to be employed is the twine factory, he is turned over to 
the guard of that particular shop. This officer instructs 
him very minutely as to shop rules and duties that will 
devolve upon him, and usually accompanies his instructions with some good, sound advice as to how to best get 
along with the least possible trouble. The shop foreman 
now takes him in charge and instructs him how to perform the duties required of him. 
</p>
<pb n="24" />
<p>
At the noon hour he must take off his apron, wash 
his hands and face in a bucket of water placed conveniently near the shop runner, and when the guard blows 
another sharp blast with his whistle form in line with the 
other men and prepare to march to the dining room.  He 
is now assigned a place in the ranks of his shop crew and 
told to always <q>fall in</q> at his place. The guard stamps 
his cane twice on the floor and the men begin to march 
to dinner. 
</p>
<p>
At first the <q>fresh fish</q> makes quite a number of mistakes: In the dining room he is somewhat bewildered 
as to how to make his wants known to the waiters, as he 
has been told that talking is strictly forbidden, but upon 
reading the rules in the library catalogue he easily comprehends the silent method of asking for food. If he 
wishes bread he must hold up his right hand; meat, his 
fork; soup, his spoon; vegetables, his table knife; coffee, 
his cup, and for water, the rule is to hold up the cup 
inverted. This form of the sign language is fully adequate for the situation. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE FIRST NIGHT IN HIS CELL</head>
<p>
At the close of the first day's work the prisoner is 
marched to his cell. Just inside the entrance to the cell 
house he is handed his supper in a tin dish, goes to his 
cell, previously assigned to him, and remains standing 
with his right hand on the cell door until the evening 
count of the number of prisoners in the institution has 
been verified by the deputy warden. If the count is correct the prisoners are notified by the sounding of a gong 
near the desk of the cellhouse captain, at which signal 
they are permitted to sit down and amuse themselves as 
they see fit. Immediately after the ringing of the gong 
<pb n="25 " />
the gallery men pass around tea for the prisoner's evening meal in addition to what he received when he enters 
the cellhouse. 
</p>
<p>
Our subject now has an opportunity to take a glance 
at the cell wherein he must spend his <q>little bit</q> as 
the professional crook jocularly terms his sentence. This 
apartment is not commodious nor supplied with modern 
improvements of a first-class hostelry; its dimensions 
are five by seven, and contains: one Bible, two cups, 
one small mirror, one cuspidor, one spoon, one face 
towel, one dish towel, one piece of soap, one comb, blankets, sheets, pillow cases, matress, bedstead and springs, 
one wooden chair (for first and second grade), one earthen water jar with cover, one electric light, one small 
shelf, one library catalogue and all the library and school 
books desired. If the occupant is of a philosophical bent 
of mind he will now realize that the way of the transgressor is indeed hard. The first month or two are the 
most severe upon the new arrival. His environments 
force him to dwell continually upon the depths of degradation to which he has fallen, and he suffers the keenest possible mental torture; but after passing this period 
he begins to readjust his viewpoint and adapt himself 
to his surroundings and then calmly awaits the termination of his sentence. Few people have any conception of 
what the first offender endures during his first few 
months' imprisonment; the thoughts of his jeopardized 
liberty are ever before him. In summing up and planning for the future about the worst obstacle he fears,&mdash;the quintessence of human degradation,&mdash;is the baleful 
word <q>ex-convict.</q> That alone hurled at the public 
through the medium of the public press expresses the sum 
total of moral turpitude and degeneracy. No matter if 
<pb n="26" />
the individual in question is pure-minded, the symbol of 
the culture of the age in which he lives, the hyphenated 
word <q>ex-convict</q> seems to conjure in the minds of the 
public a picture that causes them to shudder with fear 
for their safety. As a rule this fear is not shared in by 
prison officials. Only about ten per cent of the inmates 
cause them any anxiety, the rest are orderly, perform 
their work promptly and properly, and cause as little 
trouble as possible. 
</p>
<p>
Prisoners frequently remain at the work first assigned 
them until their discharge. However, if it is found too 
difficult the superintendent of the respective departments 
can assign other work. Should this be impossible a 
prisoner may put in an application to explain the situation to the warden. Each prisoner has the privilege of 
seeing the warden at least twice a month, who adjusts 
all differences of opinion between the guard and prisoner, or between prisoner and foreman. Every complaint 
of unjust treatment is investigated thoroughly by the 
warden, and equitable measures are employed to remove 
the bone of contention. If the guard or foreman is at 
fault a dignified but forcible lecture generally produces 
the desired result. This is also true where the inmate 
has been negligent in his work, causing the trouble. 
</p>
<p>
As previously stated, if the new arrival remains at the 
task first assigned him during his entire imprisonment the 
routine from day to day is almost identical. He can attend chapel on Sundays if he wishes to do so; a Catholic 
and Lutheran chaplain preach excellent sermons each alternate Sunday. 
</p>
<p>
Sixty days prior to the expiration of sentence the outgoing prisoner is given a shaving ticket, or if he desires 
to grow a beard he can do so, if not he can get a shave 
<pb n="27" />
<pb n="28" />
<pb n="29" />
each week as usual. He is given a bath and change of 
underclothing each week, and if his clothes and shoes 
need repairing he is taken to the tailor department and 
supplied with a new outfit. A few days before his time 
expires he is taken to the tailor shop and fitted to his outgoing suit of clothes, and upon the day preceding his 
discharge is sent to the cellhouse barber shop, where he 
is given a hair cut and shave.
</p>

<figure url="images/mencell.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Interior of Men's Cell </head>
<figDesc>Interior of Men's Cell </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/emplding.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Employee's Dining Room </head>
<figDesc>Employee's Dining Room </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/offkitch.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Officers' Kitchen</head>
<figDesc>Officers' Kitchen</figDesc>
</figure>
 
</div>


<div>
<head type="sub">THE PRISONER'S RELEASE</head>
<p>
Now arrives the day so anxiously anticipated by those 
incarcerated in our penitentiary. A new beginning and 
a new chapter in their life's history is before them. It is 
an event that so greatly excites the average outgoing 
prisoner that he hardly knows what he is doing, and in 
many cases his nerves are in such a condition that 
he is unable to sign the receipt for the money that he 
receives. The inmate in the forenoon is notified of 
his release, and is immediately taken to the tailor 
shop, where he dons his discharged clothing, is given 
any personal belongings that may have been in his 
cell by the captain of the cell-house, who inspects them 
in order to ascertain whether or not he is the owner 
thereof. He is now conducted to the administration 
building by the deputy warden, where he is given his 
discharge papers and twenty-five dollars in money, 
a sum provided by law for each released prisoner. 
Just before he walks into the world a free man the 
former inmate is told to step into the warden's office, 
and this gentleman gives his departing <q>guest</q> a few 
words of helpful advice, bidding him Godspeed on his 
journey. 
</p>
</div>

<pb n="30" />

<div>
<head type="sub">WHY SOCIETY SHOULD ACCORD HIM A SQUARE DEAL</head>
<p>
The discharged prisoner is now in the hands and at 
the mercy of society. If he is accorded a square deal 
he may become a useful citizen. If it is his misfortune 
to become associated with bigoted zealots who taunt him 
with his past degradation the chances are that he will 
become a criminal again and prove a source of great expense to the state. 
</p>
<p>
In closing this chapter it would be well to suggest that 
every ex-convict is not a dyed-in-the-wool villian, but 
that persecution may make him such in the course of 
events. Is he entitled to a square deal? Most assuredly 
so, especially if he is employed at honest work and his 
every action shows determination to lead an upright life. 
He has sinned against society, it is true, but without question he has paid the debt of his transgression a hundred 
fold by his imprisonment. Still, after all has been said, 
a bad reputation is a difficult thing to live down, even 
that which clings to the free citizen. The discharged 
prisoner's chief reliance, therefore, in the final analysis 
is to so circumspectly conduct himself as to place him 
above the carping criticisms of his new associates. If he 
follows this course his neighbors are not likely to keep 
their eyes on his <q>cracked</q> reputation. 
</p>


<figure url="images/deco_p30.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<figDesc>Cell Door Decorative Illustration</figDesc>
</figure>

<pb n="31" />

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>DEPARTMENTS AND INDUSTRIES OF THE MINNESOTA STATE PRISON </head>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE ADMINISTRATION BUILDING.</head>
<p>
The administration building is directly under the charge 
of Warden Wolfer. He has the power to appoint all 
subordinate officers and employes and discharge them 
for inefficiency and insubordination. As chief executive 
officer of the prison, under the supervision of the State 
Board of Control, the warden is directly responsible for 
its successful management, the humane treatment and 
reformation of the inmates placed in his care for safe 
keeping. 
</p>
<p>
Warden Wolfer is one of the best prison men in this 
country and the enviable reputation Minnesota's penitentiary has attained is due entirely to his long and successful experience in handling criminals. He has headed the 
Stillwater institution for nearly twenty years and has 
conducted the affairs of the prison in a sane and business-like manner. Under his unceasing vigilance the institution has emerged from a non-paying to a profit-earning 
enterprise, and today it is one of the best self-supporting 
institutions in the world, for, in our opinion, Europe has 
nothing that can compare with it. Mr. Wolfer has received many flattering offers from other states to take 
charge of their penal institutions, but he has declined, 
preferring to remain at the head of the institution that 
he has worked so faithfully to perfect. 
</p>
<pb n="32" />
<p>
The position of warden of the Minnesota state prison 
is no sinecure, for that presiding officer is one of the 
busiest men in the state. The business connected with 
the twine plant, conducted almost entirely on a mail-order basis, is colossal in itself, there being nearly fifteen 
million pounds to be disposed of each year. In addition 
to this important item the task of maintaining peace and 
harmony among the officers, guards, employes and the 
(at present) seven hundred prisoners assumes monumental proportions. However, Mr. Wolfer has succeeded in performing this gigantic labor for all concerned 
year in and year out with rare tact and good judgment. 
</p>
<p>
For comparative purposes, the expenses ten years ago, 
with a population of 504 prisoners, exceeded the earnings 
by $35,285.04, whereas the earnings for 1906-7 were 
$329,735.70, a remarkable showing indeed and speaking 
well for the executive ability of the present management. 
</p>
<p>
Warden Wolfer is an excellent type of the successful 
self-made man. From a guard in his youth at the Joliet 
(Ill.) penitentiary and later in charge of the Detroit 
House of Correction, he was enabled to accept the wardenship of the Stillwater, Minnesota, institution. 
</p>
<p>
There are several assistants employed in the executive 
department, where the method of conducting the business of the prison is thoroughly systematized and the organization is as nearly perfect as possible. The warden is 
at all times in touch with every detail of the institution 
and all correspondence of the prison, of whatsoever nature, passes through his hands for final disposition. He 
makes a trip each day through the various departments, 
morning and afternoon, to personally ascertain that 
everything is in proper order. This watchfulness produces good results; for instance, a short time ago he 
<pb n="33" />
<pb n="34" />
<pb n="35" />
found a guard in the act of assaulting a prisoner and 
immediately discharged him. Again, he overheard a 
guard using extremely abusive language toward a prisoner and reduced his salary in consequence. As all such 
offenses are posted on a bulletin board just outside of the 
warden's office and in the corridor leading into the 
prison the officers and guards are careful in their treatment of inmates under their charge.
</p>

<figure url="images/davis.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Horace W. Davis, Chief Clerk and Accounting Officer.</head>
<figDesc>Horace W. Davis, Chief Clerk and Accounting Officer.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/mainstrt.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Main Street Inside Prison Walls </head>
<figDesc>Main Street Inside Prison Walls </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/sundrill.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Convicts During Sunday Drill </head>
<figDesc>Convicts During Sunday Drill </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
Minnesota should rightly feel proud of her penal institution, and especially of Warden Wolfer, who has 
advanced the prison to the high standard of efficiency it 
occupies in the ranks of modern penology. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">The Deputy Warden's Headquarters</head>
<div>
<p>
The deputy warden ranks next to the warden in the 
administration duties of Minnesota's penal institution; 
in fact, he is the warden's right-hand man in conducting 
the disciplinary affairs of the institution. Much depends 
upon his efficiency in promoting harmony and goodwill 
among the prisoners. 
</p>
<p>
The deputy warden's office is located on the ground 
floor of the hospital building, and it is here that all the 
statistical records of incoming prisoners are preserved, 
such as the Bertillon measurements, finger-print system, 
etc. 
</p>
<p>
The duties of the deputy warden are many and arduous. Mr. Backland has had many years experience as a 
prison man and is very popular among the officers, guards 
and employees. He is always courteous to guards and 
prisoners alike. The following are the duties governing 
the deputy warden: 
</p>
</div>
<pb n="36" />

<div>
<head type="sub2">Duties of the Deputy Warden</head>

<list type="ordered">
<item>
The Deputy Warden is the assistant and agent of the 
Warden in the government and management of the inmates of 
the prison&mdash;more particularly in securing compliance with its 
rules by the subordinate officers, employees and inmates. 
</item>
<item>
He shall be present daily at the prison from the hour of 
unlocking in the morning until after the inmates shall have 
been locked up at night, unless leave of absence has been granted 
by the Warden, and he shall visit the prison occasionally at 
night, and personally ascertain that the inmates are secure and 
that the officers are on duty and alert. 
</item>
<item>
In the absence of the Warden, the Deputy shall perform 
the duty of that office relating to the government and management of the inmates of the prison. His orders shall be respected 
and obeyed by subordinate officers, guards, employees and inmates, so far as relates to discipline and carrying out such rules 
and orders of the Board of Control as are not otherwise delegated. 
</item>
<item>
Under the order of the Warden, the Deputy Warden shall 
have special control and direction of all officers under his own 
rank, and all guards and employees of the prison, and shall be 
responsible that everyone performs his respective duties with 
intelligence, fidelity and zeal. It shall also be his duty to promptly report to the Warden every neglect of duty, impropriety, or 
misconduct, on the part of any officer, guard, or employee. 
</item>
<item>
The Deputy Warden shall be minute in the inspection of 
every person when coming on duty, especially armed guards, and 
of their arms, and shall report to the Warden the name of any 
person who may come on duty under the influence of intoxicants, or without being in an appropriate uniform, or whose 
uniform is not in good condition; and all who are unworthy or 
inefficient from any cause. 
</item>
<item>
He may grant leave of absence to any officer, guard, or 
employee for a period of one day, but no longer, without consulting the Warden, except on emergent occasions, and then only 
in the absence of the Warden. The Deputy Warden shall enforce obedience to the rules and regulations, and to all orders 
given by the Warden, and shall maintain, generally, the police 
and discipline of the prison with the strictest exactness. For 
<pb n="37" />
<pb n="38" />
<pb n="39" />
that purpose he shall frequently, during the day, but at irregular 
intervals and without notice, visit the shops, towers, yards, 
guardposts, hospital, kitchen, cells and all other apartments of 
the prison, and the different places where work is being done, 
and take every precaution for the security of the place and its 
inmates. And he shall see that the officers and guards are vigilant and attentive to their duty, and that they keep the inmates 
in their charge diligently employed during the hours of labor. 
</item>
<item>
He shall not permit any book, pamphlet or newspaper to 
be read by, or be in possession of, any subordinate officer, guard, 
foreman, or employee, while on duty in or about the prison. 
Nor shall he permit the use of liquor or smoking on the premises 
by any such officer, instructor, guard, or employee, while on duty. 
</item>
<item>
When an inmate is received the Deputy Warden shall see 
that he is bathed, shaved and has his hair cut, clothed in the 
suit of a second grade inmate, and duly presented to the Physician for examination, after which he shall measure him according to the Bertillon system, and also carefully examine into his 
past history and character, reporting same on blanks furnished 
for that purpose, after which he shall assign him to work under 
the direction of the Warden. He shall, at short intervals, but 
irregularly examine the gates, locks, doors, levers and gratings 
in and about the prison, and see that they are in a good and safe 
condition. 
</item>
<item>
He shall exercise due vigilance to see that there is no unnecessary waste or loss of the property of the prison, and that 
there is the strictest economy in the consumption and the use 
of supplies. Also that thorough neatness, cleanliness and good 
order are maintained throughout all the buildings and the 
grounds. 
</item>
<item>
He shall make himself acquainted with the social habits 
and conduct of every subordinate officer, guard or employee of 
the prison, and particularly whether, when off duty, such officer, 
guard or employee is a frequenter of saloons or other houses of 
similar resort, or associates with idle or loose characters, and 
report his information to the Warden. 
</item>
<item>
He shall see that no material is allowed to be placed near 
the enclosing walls, and that nothing is accessible to inmates 
which might facilitate escape. He shall especially see that all 
ladders are properly secured.
</item>
<pb n="40" />
<item>
As all business must first be directed through the office 
of the institution, he shall have a vigilant eye over every person 
who may have business with the prison, yards and workshops. 
And also see that nothing which has not been authorized by inspection in the office is carried in or out for inmates or others; 
and that no communication is held by such person with any inmate, except by authority granted, and in the presence of an 
officer. 
</item>
<item>
He shall, every night, before relieving the officers and 
guards from duty, verify, by actual count of inmates to be made 
by subordinates, the written daily count report furnished him 
from the office. 
</item>
<item>
As the prison reformatory law affords to inmates the 
privilege of earning diminution of imprisonment from maximum 
sentence, affects their grade standing, and in consequence their 
chances for parole, it will be incumbent upon all authorities of 
the prison to give the strictest attention to the conduct of each, 
that no injustice be done to any inmate or to the state. And especially it shall be the duty of the Deputy Warden to satisfy 
himself as to the behavior of each inmate, and his industry, 
alacrity and zeal in the execution of his work, so that he may be 
able to advise with the Warden as to the merits and proper 
standing of each. For this purpose he shall, when making his 
rounds, frequently communicate with officers, guards and employees. 
</item>
<item>
All breaches of discipline, or other offenses by an inmate, 
must be immediately reported in writing by the officer in charge 
to the Deputy Warden, who shall, at the earliest opportunity, 
make full inquiry into the facts. And if he cannot easily excuse or correct the offender without the infliction of a penalty, 
he will make a full report to the Warden, at the earliest practical moment, and inflict such punishment as may be necessary 
under his direction. 
</item>
<item>
The Deputy Warden shall select from the trusty inmates 
a sufficient number to compose a well regulated fire department 
and assign them to their respective duties and stations in conjunction and in harmony with the Chief Engineer. Frequent 
tests of the fire apparatus shall be made and frequent false alarms 
given and runs made to test the efficiency of the department. 
</item>
<item>
He shall take careful invoice of all personal property 
brought in by prisoners, and deposit it with the Chief Clerk for 
safe keeping. It shall also be his duty to store and preserve in 
as good condition as possible the clothing worn by a prisoner 
when requested to do so by said prisoner. 
</item>
<item>
The Deputy Warden will assign inmates to the several 
employments and make details of inmates to act as runners, 
messengers, or distributors of material in shops or elsewhere, 
and will decide how far such inmates may converse with other 
inmates, and give them such permission if any is necessary, 
through the officer in charge. He will, each day, make a written report to the Warden, giving the number of inmates on the 
previous day and how many were employed. 
</item>
</list>

<figure url="images/backland.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Deputy Warden Backland's Office, with Inmate Clerk </head>
<figDesc>Deputy Warden Backland's Office, with Inmate Clerk </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/bandent.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prisoner's Band with Convicts Entering Cellhouse </head>
<figDesc>Prisoner's Band with Convicts Entering Cellhouse </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/womancel.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Interior of Woman's Cell</head>
<figDesc>Interior of Woman's Cell</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/bandent2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Band with Convicts Entering Cellhouse After Outing on Holiday</head>
<figDesc>Band with Convicts Entering Cellhouse After Outing on Holiday</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/bandent3.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prisoner Band and Convicts Entering Cellhouse </head>
<figDesc>Prisoner Band and Convicts Entering Cellhouse </figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/citleave.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Citizens Who Work in Shoe-Shop Leaving Prison Through Main Gate</head>
<figDesc>Citizens Who Work in Shoe-Shop Leaving Prison Through Main Gate</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/barber.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Officer's Barber Shop with Inmate Barber</head>
<figDesc>Officer's Barber Shop with Inmate Barber</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/coolroom.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Room where Breads and Pastries are Cooled</head>
<figDesc>Room where Breads and Pastries are Cooled</figDesc>
</figure>


</div>

<div>
<p>
On this floor are also located the punishment cells, the 
crank department and the insane ward. At the present 
time there are about twenty insane prisoners there and 
many are very dangerous and quite difficult to handle. 
Mike Brennan has been locked in this ward for many 
years. He is a life prisoner, has violent homicidal tendencies and has attacked several prisoners before being 
finally separated from his fellow inmates. 
</p>
<p>
Mike Cunningham, who recently killed another prisoner and received a life sentence, is confined in the crank 
department. Cunningham is very treacherous. He conceals a sharp instrument about his person to use whenever an opportunity presents itself. He is guarded with 
great care by the officer in charge to see that he obtains 
nothing of a dangerous nature. 
</p>
<p>
Each afternoon the deputy warden holds court in his 
office; at this time all reports of the various guards are 
considered and reprimands administered for violations 
of prison rules. The charge is first read to the offender 
and he is permitted to reply in his own defense. If he 
can prove extenuating circumstances in excuse for his 
breach of the rules he is excused; if not, reprimanded 
<pb n="41" />
<pb n="42" />
<pb n="43" />
<pb n="44" />
and perhaps deprived of his tobacco and writing tickets 
for three or four weeks; without these tickets the privilege is withheld. 
</p>
<p>
It is well to state that no high-priced attorneys are 
retained by the accused in this <q>court</q> in order to locate 
a full-grown technicality whereby the chances of escaping censure are greatly enhanced. If the inmate has 
committed a serious offense the deputy warden is empowered to order the culprit put in the solitary for several days on bread and water. 
</p>
<p>
Corporal punishment is strictly prohibited, and no 
guard or officer is permitted to <q>club</q> a prisoner except 
in self defense or to quell a mutiny. The following are 
the principal offenses for which prisoners are reported: 
</p>

<list>
<item>Altering clothing.</item> 
<item>Bed not properly made.</item>
<item>Clothing not in proper order.</item> 
<item>Communicating by signs. </item>
<item>Defacing property. </item>
<item>Dilatory.</item>
<item>Dirty cell or furnishings. </item>
<item>Disobedience. </item>
<item>Disturbance in cellhouse. </item>
<item>Fighting. </item>
<item>Hands in pockets.</item> 
<item>Hands or face not clean.</item> 
<item>Hair not combed. </item>
<item>Impertinence to visitors. </item>
<item>Insolence to officers. </item>
<item>Insolence to foremen. </item>
<item>Insolence to fellow prisoners.</item> 
<item>Inattentive in line. </item>
<item>Inattentive at work. </item>
<item>Inattentive in school. </item>
<item>Laughing and fooling. </item>
<item>Loud talk in cell. </item>
<item>Loud reading in cell. </item>
<item>Malicious mischief. </item>
<item>Not out of bed promptly. </item>
<item>Not at door for count. </item>
<item>Not wearing outside shirt. </item>
<item>Not promptly out of cell when brake is drawn. </item>
<item>Out of place in shop or line. </item>
<item>Profanity. </item>
<item>Quarreling. </item>
<item>Shirking. </item>
<item>Spitting on the floor. </item>
<item>Staring at visitors. </item>
<item>Stealing. </item>
<item>Trading. </item>
<item>Talking in chapel. </item>
<item>Talking in line. </item>
<item>Talking in school. </item>
<item>Talking at work. </item>
<item>Talking from cell to cell. </item>
<item>Talking in corridor. </item>
<item>Throwing away food. </item>
</list>

<figure url="images/cellhous.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Cellhouse Looking West. In Front of Desk on Left New Arrival is Searched</head>
<figDesc>Cellhouse Looking West. In Front of Desk on Left New Arrival is p</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/sickpark.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>The Hospital in Background, and Sick Prisoners in Park</head>
<figDesc>The Hospital in Background, and Sick Prisoners in Park</figDesc>
</figure>
</div>
</div>

<pb n="45" />
<pb n="46" />
<pb n="47" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">THE HOSPITAL.</head>
<p>
This building is located at the western end of the yard 
and at the head of the main thoroughfare of the prison. 
It is modern, well lighted, ventilated, has commodious 
rooms and a physician is always in attendance. Dr. B. 
J. Merrill has been at the head of this department for 
many years and is considered one of the best physicians 
and surgeons in the state. He is assisted by a resident 
physician constantly in attendance. The head physician 
visits the prison each morning at nine o'clock and prescribes for those present at <q>sick call.</q> This call, as 
previously stated, takes place every morning, the men 
being gathered from the various departments of the 
prison by the assistant deputy warden. 
</p>
<p>
Any prisoner who is not feeling well need only inform 
his guard that he wishes to see the doctor and his request 
is granted. This is obligatory on the part of the guard, 
as the physician's orders are final in such matters. 
</p>
<p>
When the sick-call men arrive at the hospital they 
form in line just outside the door and are called into 
the doctor's office one at a time. The inmate states his 
complaint and his name and prescription is entered on 
the records. If too sick to work he is permitted to 
either stay in the hospital, loaf in the park or remain in 
a cell for the day. There are several cells in the cell-house which are used exclusively for this purpose. After 
the chronic cases have been disposed of the chief physician attends to the more serious ailments. He also 
prescribes the diet for the sick prisoners, and if they order anything that is not in the culinary department it is 
purchased at once. 
</p>
<p>
The hospital is well patronized by the inmates. During
<pb n="48" />
the month of July, 1908, 2,018 cases were disposed 
of. But the building used for a hospital is now altogether inadequate to accommodate the growing demands of the institution, as the population of the prison 
has practically doubled during the past decade. 
</p>
<p>
With regard to epidemics the prison has been very fortunate and the mortality list has been exceedingly small. 
The death rate for 1908 was only nine, principally due 
to tuberculosis, a disease which is quite prevalent in penitentiaries the world over. 
</p>
<p>
During the summer months the convalescent patients 
are permitted the freedom of the park all day. Those 
who are unable to walk are carried down and given an 
opportunity to get the beneficial outdoor air. 
</p>
<p>
The following rules give a clear idea of the duties of 
chief physician: 
</p>

<div>
<head type="sub">Duties of the Prison Physician</head>
<list type="ordered">
<item>
The Physician shall visit the prison every day, between the 
hours of seven and ten in the morning, and examine and prescribe for all sick inmates, and also at such other times as the 
condition of the inmates may demand. He shall also visit all 
prisoners in the sick cells who are unable to come to sick call. 
If sent for at any time by the Warden or Deputy Warden to 
attend an inmate he shall immediately do so to the exclusion of 
all other engagements. 
</item>
<item>
He shall examine every inmate on his entering the prison, 
and record in a book for that purpose his name, date of entrance, date of examination, nationality and race of inmate, and 
of his parents; his weight, stature and heredity, so far as affects 
his criminality or health; also the condition of his heart, lungs 
and other organs; the rate of pulse and respiration; the measurement of the chest and abdomen, and any existing disease, 
deformity or other acquired or inherited disability, and he shall 
immediately vaccinate him. 
</item>
<item>
He shall keep a record of all admissions to and discharges 
<pb n="49" />
<pb n="50" />
<pb n="51" />
from the hospital, and of all cases treated by him, with the name, 
number and the place of the inmate, and the diagnosis and treatment, with such observations as may assist in forming a perfect 
record of each patient. 
</item>
<item>
He shall make a written report daily to the Warden of 
the attendance at the sick call in the morning, and of the disposition made of those reported sick. And also of all admissions to, and discharges from the hospital. 
</item>
<item>
He shall, every morning, carefully examine all inmates 
in the solitary cells, or in special restraint or punishment elsewhere, and shall make a written report to the Warden as to the 
condition of each. He shall be particular to report to the Warden in writing any inmate whose health he thinks is being injured by the punishment or restraint he is being subjected to, 
and shall recommend such changes in such inmate's diet or 
otherwise as he may think necessary. In the absence of the 
Physician the Assistant Physician shall make similar examinations every evening, and make a written report to the Warden. 
</item>
<item>
The Physician shall frequently, and also whenever requested
by the Warden, examine all of the cells of the inmates, the 
plumbing and cell ventilators, for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether they are kept in a proper state of cleanliness and ventilation and in a good sanitary condition and report their condition to the Warden and to the official who made the request. 
</item>
<item>
He shall, whenever requested by the Warden, and also 
whenever he thinks proper, examine the quality of the provisions and condition of the food provided for inmates. Whenever he shall find that any provisions are unwholesome, or that 
the food is insufficient, or for any reason prejudicial to their 
health, he shall immediately make report thereof to the Warden. 
</item>
<item>
He shall have full control over the patients in the hospital, subject to the rules of the prison and instructions of the 
Warden, and shall give daily instructions as to the treatment 
of each patient to the assistant physician and his orders must be 
followed. 
</item>
<item>
In case an inmate claims to be unable to labor by reason 
of sickness or other disability, the Physician shall examine such 
inmate. If, in his opinion, such inmate is unable to labor, or 
his occupation should be changed, he shall immediately certify 
<pb n="52" />
the fact to the Warden. Such inmate shall thereupon be released from labor or his occupation be changed or he be admitted to the hospital or elsewhere for medical treatment, as the 
Physician shall direct, having due regard for the safe keeping 
of such inmate. When he certifies that such inmate is sufficiently recovered to be able to labor the inmate may be required 
to do so. 
</item>
<item>
He shall, whenever requested to do so by the Warden, 
make a careful examination of any inmate, and make a written 
report of his physical and mental condition. 
</item>
<item>
Whenever an inmate, in the opinion of the Physician, becomes insane, he shall certify the fact to the Warden, giving 
his reasons therefor, and make a full statement of the mental 
and physical condition of the prisoner, together with his opinion 
as to what disposition should be made of him. 
</item>
<item>
When an inmate dies the Physician shall record the cause 
of death and all the circumstances connected therewith, and as 
full a history of the previous health of the prisoner as he may 
be able, and immediately report the information to the Warden. 
</item>
<item>
When the Physician considers it necessary, or when requested by the Warden, to make a post-morten examination of 
the body of a deceased inmate, he shall do so within twenty-four hours thereafter, if possible, and shall immediately make 
a written report of the result of his examination to the Warden 
as to the cause of death. He shall also call the coroner of the 
county whenever he may deem it proper to do so. 
</item>
<item>
The Physician may be assigned an assistant to be designated as Assistant Physician and such number of nurses as 
may be necessary to properly care for the sick. Such Assistant 
Physician shall be selected by the Warden with the approval 
of the Physician, and shall carry out in full the Physician's orders in the care of the sick. 
</item>
<item>
He shall keep such books, and in such form as may be 
ordered by the Board of Control and by the Warden.
</item>
<item>
He shall report in writing to the Warden for the information of the Board of Control at its monthly meeting, the 
patients received into the hospital or treated in the cells or elsewhere during the preceding month, stating their respective ages, 
diseases, previous occupations in prison, the time they have remained
<pb n="53" />
in the hospital or cells, the date of commencement and 
termination of treatment, and number of days during which 
such patients, in consequence of sickness, have been relieved from 
labor. Also the death and cause thereof, transfers to Insane 
Asylums and such other facts, with recommendations, as he desires to submit. 
</item>
<item>
At the close of each biennial period the Physician shall 
make a report to the Board of Control as to the sanitary condition of the prison during the biennial period just passed, in 
which he shall present, in summarized form, all information included in his daily and monthly reports. The Physician will be 
responsible for all instruments and supplies in his department. 
</item>
</list>

<figure url="images/lifer.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Hospital Cell and Life Prisoner</head>
<figDesc>Hospital Cell and Life Prisoner</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/exerdril.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prisoner's Exercise Drill on Sunday</head>
<figDesc>Prisoner's Exercise Drill on Sunday</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/celldoc.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Hospital Cells, Prison Doctor and Inmates</head>
<figDesc>Hospital Cells, Prison Doctor and Inmates</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">HALLUCINATIONS OF A FEW PRISONERS</head>
<p>
Like all other penitentiaries, the Minnesota State Prison contains its quota of inmates who are slightly demented, or who have periodical fits of hallucinations. 
When these unfortunates give oral demonstrations in 
the evening after the prisoners have retired and all is 
quiet for the night they furnish considerable amusement. 
Their mental state, of course, is deplored by all, and it 
is only their language that arouses the risibilities of fellow prisoners. 
</p>

<div>
<head type="sub2">THE TELEGRAPH OPERATOR.</head> 
<p>
One of these men imagined himself to be an operator 
in St. Paul; that he had a train going out and one coming in on the same line. He was vigorously tapping 
away on one of the walls of his cell when a night guard 
asked him what troubled him. <q>This,</q> said the prisoner in all seriousness, <q>is a telegraph station in St. Paul.</q> 
<pb n="54" />
<q>Well, you had better cut this out and go to bed; the prisoners
can't sleep with all this fuss going on.</q> <q>Fuss nothing,</q>
angrily retorted the prisoner, <q>I'm attending strictly
to business! The Governor is on one of those trains
and if there is a wreck there will be trouble!</q>
</p>
<p>
The captain of the night watch immediately sent for the deputy
warden to suppress the <q>operator,</q> who, when he
arrived, and after a sharp command to be quiet, without
glancing up from his <q>key</q> ordered the deputy to go
away and <q>not interrupt him.</q> Of course this rejoinder 
caused the other inmates to burst out laughing, and no
amount of discipline could check their merriment. By
this time it was necessary to open the cell door and take the
operator bodily from his <q>key</q> and transfer him to the 
observation ward at the solitary. Just as he was relieved from
<q>duty</q> he shrieked at the deputy, <q>You will catch
h&mdash; if those two trains come together!</q> 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">THE BEDBUG INCIDENT.</head>
<p>
For some unaccountable reason the cellhouse building 
is infested with bedbugs, notwithstanding the fact that 
every effort is made to exterminate them. An afflicted 
prisoner one day stepped up to the deputy warden, respectfully
gave the customary military salute, and, with 
a solemn
face that would do credit to a judge about to impose
the death penalty, remarked: <q>Say deputy, I have a 
complaint to make.</q> <q>All right, proceed,</q> said the
deputy. <q>Well,</q> continued the prisoner, <q>there are about
five hundred inmates who pass my cell every day going to 
and from their work and each man throws a bedbug
into my cell. This d&mdash; foolishness has to be 
stopped or there will be something doing,</q> and the man looked
as though he meant business. Telling of the
<pb n="55" />
incident afterwards, the deputy said that the story was so 
absurd he could scarcely refrain from laughing. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">THE X-RAY MACHINE.</head>
<p>
There was also a prisoner whose particular form of 
dementia was in imagining that the man in the cell 
above him persited in turning an X-ray machine on him, 
and the imprecations that he would voice every now and 
then are unprintable. The incident had its laughable 
side, nevertheless, and an outburst from him was always 
very amusing. 
</p>
<p>
So, too, were the demonstrations of the man who 
imagined that he had a river on his back that emptied 
into his left ear. Every now and then he would exclaim, 
<q>Boys, the river is rising,</q> or that the <q>river was drying 
up.</q> He was absolutely harmless, but a trifle noisy. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">IMAGINES HIMSELF PRESIDENT.</head>
<p>
At present there is a life prisoner confined in the Minnesota State Prison who constantly imagines himself the 
President of the United States. He is a Russian, was 
considered quite harmless until a few years ago, when 
he threatened to kill the deputy warden, and was removed to the crank department. His conversations were 
very ludicrous, continually promising the boys who talked with him that <q>as soon as he was pardoned (which 
was always soon) he would appoint them</q> to the various 
positions at the disposal of the chief executive. As a 
humorist he was on a par with the inmate who imagines 
that his cell is full of ghosts. Every now and then this 
man proceeds to drive out these unwelcome intruders, 
and swears at them roundly. He becomes very noisy 
during this driving out process and the night guards 
<pb n="56" />
frequently command him to desist. When assured that 
the ghosts are all out of his cell he remains quiet the rest 
of the evening. These spells occur frequently, and there 
is little question but that the man really believes that 
ghosts are in his cell. 
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">PRISON HUMOR.</head>
<p>
Several years ago there was an inmate in the Stillwater penitentiary who unconsciously perpetrated one of 
the best jokes that had been heard at the institution for 
some time. He was a German and a hard-working carpenter by trade. He was honest to a fault and led a 
model life while on the outside. The crime for which 
he was sentenced was assault on a fellow workman, and 
for this offense he received a two-year sentence at the 
Stillwater penitentiary. He was immediately put to work 
for the Minnesota Thresher Co., being assigned work in 
one of the carpenter shops. One day he forgot to take 
his plug of chewing tobacco with him to the shop, having 
left it laying on the small table in his cell. That evening 
when he came in from work he found the plug of tobacco missing. He at once began calling for one of the 
night guards, and on that gentleman's arrival the prisoner remarked: 
</p>
<p>
<q>Say, Mr. Guard, dere must pe thieves in dis here 
blace. Mine tobacco's she was gone, und I harms noboddies. I dink ve petter send for dere bolicemans und 
catch sum uf dem rascals.</q> 
</p>
<p>
The foregoing story is absolutely authentic, and was 
told again and again by the prisoners who appreciate a 
good joke as keenly as their free brothers. It also brings 
out rather forcibly the fact that, notwithstanding the man 
was in prison, he was still honest. 
</p>
</div>
<pb n="57" />

<div>
<head type="sub">THE VERSATILE PRISONER.</head>
<p>
It is quite generally known that the prisoners at the 
Minnesota state prison are prohibited from talking, and 
what conversation there is, generally takes place on a 
holiday or is permitted in cases where their work makes 
talking necessary. One day there was committed to the 
prison a man who was proficient in a dozen different 
languages. The deputy warden was examining the man 
as to his birth, nationality, religion, etc., and when he 
asked the prisoner his nationality he replied that he 
could talk in several different languages. <q>Hump,</q> grunted the deputy, <q>we talk English here and d&mdash; little of
that.</q>
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">CAPT. <q>JACK</q> CRAWFORD'S JOKE ON THE GUARDS.</head>
<p>
Several years ago the poet-scout, Capt. <q>Jack</q> Crawford, delivered a lecture in the prison chapel to the inmates. In passing it is well to state that this well-known 
lecturer makes it a point to visit the various penal and 
charitable institutions throughout the country free of 
charge, hence his friendly call at the Stillwater prison. 
</p>
<p>
During the course of Mr. Crawford's remarks he 
paused in his discourse and said: <q>Men, I heartily sympathize with you for being in the unfortunate condition 
you are, but (and the speaker pointed his hands at each 
side of the room where the guards were stationed) if 
these high-toned gentlemen in blue uniforms were dressed 
in the same clothes you are and placed among you, why 
I couldn't tell the difference between you!</q> 
</p>
<p>
This unintentional joke at the guards caused a great 
deal of applause, but when Mr. Crawford's remarks are 
<pb n="58" />
examined by cold, logic, it will be found that he simply 
told the truth and that the dissimilarity is a question 
of clothes and nothing else.
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">FEEDING THE DONKEYS.</head>
<p>
When the prison band was first organized the inmate 
musicians made a noise that was something indescribable. 
It sounded like a sawmill blowing up, or a handsaw striking a 60-penny spike. One day one of the highly-strung 
nervous chaps went up to the deputy warden and asked 
permission to buy a bale of hay. 
</p>
<p>
<q>What do you want hay for?</q> asked the deputy. 
</p>
<p>
<q>Why,</q> replied the prisoner, <q>I would like to present 
a bale of hay to those jackasses in the park who are 
making all that confounded noise.</q> 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">TRICKS OF PRISONERS WHO SHAM ILLNESS</head>
<p>
A prison is not an admirable place for those disinclined 
to work. A man occasionally succeeds in hoodwinking the 
authorities for a time, but this rarely occurs. Whenever there is a reasonable doubt the prisoner is given the 
benefit of it. A case in particular is that of one Mr. 
B., who complained that the entire lower part of his 
body was paralyzed and that he was unable to walk. He 
was given a pair of crutches and put in the hospital 
ward, where he lived well, his wants supplied by the attendants and where he had absolutely nothing to do. The 
doctors suspected that he was faking and secretly applied 
tests to verify their belief. Evidently the man was on 
his guard and fully acquainted with the various modes 
of procedure in such cases, for he stood the tests unflinchingly. 
</p>
<pb n="59" />
<p>
Finally Warden Wolfer took his case under personal 
charge and evolved a plan that the clever prisoner had 
not figured on as one of the possibilities of detection. 
The strategy was this: A newly-appointed guard was 
dressed in a third-grade suit of convict clothes on the 
day when the prisoners in the crank department were 
given their weekly shave. Mr. B. was sitting on the 
bench waiting to be shaved. The deputy warden stepped 
into the room with the alleged third-grade prisoner and 
gruffly ordered him to be seated, then turned to the barber and told him to shave the third-grade man next, as 
he was in a hurry. Not an inkling of suspicion flashed 
across Mr. B.'s brain. In the door leading into this 
ward a small peep-hole is arranged, enabling the guard 
to look into the room without entering. The warden was 
stationed behind this door to observe the results of this 
scheme. As the third-grade <q>prisoner</q> sat down to be 
shaved he suddenly seized one of the barber's razors, and, 
with a whoop, jumped out of the chair and made for the 
<q>helpless</q> Mr. B., who immediately cast aside his 
crutches and rushed down the corridor to escape from 
the supposed demented <q>prisoner.</q> The fact that his legs 
were paralyzed and that he was acting a part was entirely 
forgotten. 
</p>
<p>
At this stage of the proceedings the warden entered 
the room and informed the crestfallen Mr. B. that the 
comedy was over. At first he was inclined to continue 
the paralytic roll, but when informed that he had the 
option of going to work or taking an indefinite stay on a 
bread-and-water diet he wisely chose the first alternative, 
and for the remainder of his term gave no more trouble. 
</p>
<p>
Another case of shirking is that of Mr. M., who is a 
life prisoner and who has spent over a quarter of a 
<pb n="60" />
century behind the bars of Minnesota's famous penal institution. He insisted that something was wrong with 
his limbs and that he could not walk; that he needed 
the assistance of crutches, but one night one of the 
nurses observed him walking back and forth in his cell, 
evidently taking a needed constitutional. He was sent 
to work in a few days and is today walking as successfully as ever. He employed this deception for many 
years. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">A <q>HORSE</q> ON THE PRISON PHYSICIAN.</head>
<p>
Some time ago there arrived at the prison a man who 
appeared to be, as far as visible appearances were concerned, a chronic sufferer from epileptic fits. On the 
day he entered prison he had two of these fits, and almost 
every day thereafter they occurred with surprising frequency. The assistant physician was always called on 
these occasions, but could do nothing for the sufferer, 
he being thoroughly convinced that the fits were the real 
article. The prisoner was given an easy position in the 
cellhouse, as it was considered too dangerous to have him 
working in the shops alongside of the machines, belting, 
etc. 
</p>
<p>
Finally, however, this easy job began to pall on the 
epileptic prisoner's nerves; and he asked the deputy warden to be transferred to the shops. <q>I can't do it,</q> said 
the deputy, <q>as it would be against the physician's orders 
to change your work.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Well, if that is the case I will have to cut out the 
fit business,</q> replied the prisoner. 
</p>
<p>
<q>What do you mean?</q> asked the deputy warden. 
</p>
<p>
<q>These fits are all fakes,</q> smilingly retorted the prisoner, <q>and I can cut them out any time.</q> 
</p>
<pb n="61" />
<p>
<q>The only way you can convince me that these epileptic fits are not genuine is to stop having them. If you 
do this for thirty days, I will give you any job you want.</q> 
</p>
<p>
The prisoner got the job, greatly to the mystification 
of the physicians and the deputy warden. 
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">ESCAPES FROM PRISON</head>
<p>
There has been but one successful escape during 
the eighteen years that Warden Wolfer has had charge 
of the prison. A capture was, however, effected a few 
days later.  The escape was neatly planned, and the 
<q>loophole</q> through which he crawled could only have 
been detected by one who was constantly looking for a 
chance to <q>fly the coop,</q> using a prisoner's expression. 
Opportunity came to him in the following manner: It 
was the custom of the captain of the cellhouse to unlock 
the doors immediately after the men had left their cells. 
In the fall of the year it is still quite dark when the 
prisoners march into the dining room to breakfast. On 
the morning that Mr. B. made his escape he simply remained in his cell, and as soon as the captain of the cell 
house unlocked the side doors and went back to his desk 
came out of his cell, cautiously made his way out of one 
of the side doors and made a beeline for the wall near the 
railroad gate, negotiating the same near this point. The 
wall guard imagined that he saw some one go over the 
top of the wall and fired several shots in that direction, 
but it was still very dark and he was uncertain just what 
it was. The prisoner got away without a scratch, but, 
as previously stated, was recaptured a few days later. 
Shot by a farmer whom he tried to rob and received 
a bad bullet wound in one of his ankles. The farmer, 
however, was not aware of his identity,&mdash;had ordered 
<pb n="62" />
him off his premises, but the prisoner acted in a threatening manner and was thereupon shot. 
</p>
<p>
About seventeen years ago another attempt to escape 
was made by a desperate young fellow and two companions. They evaded the guard, slipped out of the shop 
near the wagon gate and then waited where they were 
not observed; then a dash for freedom through this 
big double gate as it swung open to permit a team 
to pass out. All three were apprehended shortly afterwards under the warehouse building of the Minnesota 
Thresher Co., where they had sought temporary refuge. 
This was just opposite the prison. It is very improbable 
that any more attempts will be made through this gate, a 
guard now being stationed on the wall above the gate 
and one across the street. Formerly there was but one 
guard in charge of the gate, which had a tendency to invite attack at this quarter. 
</p>


<figure url="images/band.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prison Band </head>
<figDesc>Prison Band </figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/bandpark.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prison Band In Park </head>
<figDesc>Prison Band In Park </figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/trainbak.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prison Train Backing Into Prison Yard to be Loaded with Twine </head>
<figDesc>Prison Train Backing Into Prison Yard to be Loaded with Twine </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/trainleav.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Train Leaving Prison Yard After Loading </head>
<figDesc>Train Leaving Prison Yard After Loading </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
About twenty-five years ago a prisoner, Frank Landis 
by name, made as successful an escape as was ever made 
from any institution. He sawed the bars on one of the 
cell house windows, squeezed himself through and has 
never been heard from since. Landis had arrived in St. 
Paul one day and victimized business men out of nearly 
twenty-five thousand dollars. He represented himself to 
be the son of a rich merchant of La Crosse, Wis., and, 
to allay suspicion, invited one of the merchants to telegraph at his expense as to his credentials. He evidently 
had a confederate at the other end of the line, as word 
came back that he was O. K. After getting this merchant to cash his checks he next induced him to introduce 
the generous buyer to other merchants, the aforesaid merchant vouching for his standing in each instance. One 
<pb n="63" />


<pb n="64" />
<pb n="65" />
man became suspicious, and early the next morning communicated with La Crosse and received immediate advice that the name was unknown. Then the hunt for 
Landis began, but he had departed for parts unknown, 
was later captured and received twenty years in the Stillwater penitentiary. Here his stay was of short duration, 
as he soon made his escape. 
</p>
<p>
On a previous page we stated that there had been but 
one escape from the Minnesota State Prison since Mr. 
Wolfer has been warden. Recently, however, a <q>trusty,</q> 
who had been acting as coachman, took advantage of the 
freedom allowed him and disappeared. This is not considered by the officials as an escape in the true sense of the 
word. Below we give the <q>trusty's</q> picture with the 
Bertillon Measurements. 
</p>

<figure url="images/petwray.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<figDesc>Allus Petwray</figDesc>
</figure>

<list>
<item>Height, 1 m 75 1 </item>
<item>Height 5 ft. 9 in.</item>
<item>Outs A 1 m 82 </item>
<item>Trunk 90 </item>
<item>Head Length 19.8</item>
<item>Head Width 15.3</item>
<item>Cheek Width 13.6</item>
<item>R. Ear 7.2</item>
<item>L. Foot 27.4d1</item>
<item>L. Mid F. 11.6</item>
<item>L. Lit. F. 9.2</item>
<item>L Forearm 48.1</item>
</list>

<pb n="66" />


<p>
Name, Allus Petwray, No. 2654. Nationality, African; age, 30; 
color, Negro; build, muscular; complexion, M. brown; hair, black; 
eyes, Mar. deep; weight. 161. 
</p>
<p>
Sentenced March 1, 1909; term, 2&frac12; years. From Polk county, 
for the crime of grand larceny, second degree. 
</p>
<p>
Marks and scars: 1 cut:- hor. rec. 1.5 c at 3 d ph. R. III-Cut:- 
rec. hor. 4c at on &amp; sr. of cen. sr. brw. III-Cic;- rec. ob. 1c at slt. 
over &amp; sr. out. pt. sr. eye. III-cut:-rec. ver. sit. ob. 3c at 2.5 to 
front dx. tragus. III-Cut:-rec. ob. 8c at 3 over dx. ear. 
</p>
<p>
Occupation, coachman. 
</p>
<p>
This photograph and record of Bertillon Measurements has been sent broadcast to all the police departments in the United States and Canada, and his recapture will probably be <q>only a question of time.</q> 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">BREAKING INTO PRISON</head>
<p>
We have just related some cases where men have 
broken out of prison, and it is in order to state the facts 
regarding a robbery that took place at the prison. A 
man actually broke into prison for the purpose of stealing. He had procured a rope ladder and scaled one of 
the rear walls, made his way to the Western Shoe company's factory and selected the finest case of shoes he 
could find. He then retraced his way to the wall, tied 
a rope to the case of shoes, climbed up and went away 
as though the act of stealing shoes from a penitentiary 
was an every-day accomplishment for him. He was also 
captured, and it was then discovered that he had been a 
former inmate, accounting for his familiarity with the 
grounds. The place is constantly patroled by two night 
watchmen, and it is still a mystery how he managed to 
evade them. This act might have been performed out 
of a spirit of reckless bravado to demonstrate to the other 
inmates that he was fully capable. His little stunt, however, cost him another residence of three and one-half 
years at the prison. 
</p>
</div>

<pb n="67" />

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">THE PAROLE SYSTEM</head>
<p>
The state of Minnesota was one of the first to introduce the grading and parole systems in its prison. Speaking of this feature, Warden Wolfer says: 
</p>
<p>
<q>We have paroled 934 prisoners since the parole law went into 
effect in 1894. We now have 72 prisoners on parole, three of 
whom are females. Of those paroled 716 were committed on 
a definite sentence, and 218 on Reformatory Plan.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The grading and parole law continues to work satisfactorily 
and gives much promise and encouragement for the future. We 
are often disappointed by the failure of promising parole men 
to make good, but on the other hand, we are as often encouraged by the less promising who have made good beyond our 
most sanguine expectations. All of which demonstrates the 
limitation of human judgment and the difficulty of <q>reading the 
human heart aright.</q> Most of those who break parole are carried over the line by some weakness, usually intemperance, a 
weakness that they do not seem able to control.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>We are glad to be able to say that our expedience with the 
grading and parole system gives us growing encouragement and 
hope for the future, because we believe we have hopeful and 
satisfying evidence that few men break their parole because of 
the desire to do wrong. As a rule, the parole breaker heartily 
regrets his misstep, and frequently will make good if given another chance.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The parole embodies those ethical principles of conduct that 
make for normal life and good character. Rationally and constructively applied, it builds up and encourages manhood and at 
the same time it discourages a disposition to yield to weakening 
impulses that lead to wrongdoing. Every possible effort should 
be made to apprehend and return the fugitive parole breaker, 
for if allowed to remain at large he is almost sure to become 
a confirmed criminal. Therefore, a more thorough supervision 
of paroled prisoners is necessary, and a more accurate system 
for the apprehension and identification of parole breakers seems 
imperative in every state, and throughout the country, wherever 
the parole system is in vogue.</q>
</p>
<pb n="68" />
<p>
<q>Of the 934 prisoners paroled 59 per cent were finally discharged by reason of expiration of definite sentence; 13 2-3 per 
cent, who were committed on the Reformatory Plan, were discharged by the board after having given satisfactory evidence 
of a desire and purpose to live honestly and become good citizens; 19 2-3 per cent of the whole number paroled violated their 
paroles; 17 1-3 per cent of the whole number were returned to 
prison to serve unexpired sentences, leaving 2 1-3 per cent 
parole violators now at large.</q> 
</p>
<p>
This system has had a marked tendency to improve 
the discipline of the prison, for it impels inmates to bend 
every effort to merit this consideration at the hands of 
the state authorities. The state law governing the parole of prisoners from the penitentiary is as follows: 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE PAROLE LAW</head>
<p>
<emph rend="font-variant: bold">Parole of Prisoners,</emph>&mdash;The State Board of Control may 
parole any prisoner: Provided, 
</p>
<list type="ordered">
<item>
No convict shall be paroled who has been previously convicted of a felony other than the one for which he is serving 
sentence, either in this state or elsewhere. 
</item>
<item>
No convict serving a time sentence shall be paroled until 
he shall have served at least one-half of his full term, not reckoning good time. 
</item>
<item>
No convict serving a life sentence shall be paroled until 
he has served thirty-five years, less the diminution which would 
have been allowed for good conduct had his sentence been for 
thirty-five years, and then only by unanimous consent, in writing, of the members of the Board of Pardons. 
</item>
<item>
Such convicts while on parole shall remain in the legal 
custody and under control of the Board of Control, subject at 
any time to be returned to the prison or reformatory, and the 
written order of said board, certified by the Warden, shall be a 
sufficient warrant to any officer to retake and return to actual 
custody any such convict. Geographical limits wholly within 
<pb n="69" />
<pb n="70" />
<pb n="71" />
the state may be fixed in each case, and the same enlarged or reduced according to the conduct of the prisoners. 
</item>
<item>
In considering applications for parole said board shall not 
entertain any petition, receive any written communication, or 
bear any argument from any attorney or other person not connected with said prison, in favor of the parole of any prisoner, 
but it may institute inquiries by correspondence or otherwise 
as to the previous history or character of such prisoner. 
</item>
</list>
<p>
At the present time nearly all the states have inaugurated the parole and grading system similar to the law 
in operation in this state, and some are considering the 
advisability of introducing the system. This law is one 
of the best measures of the so-called modern penology 
and one in which the leading authorities on such matters 
feel the most pride. 
</p>

<figure url="images/safeblow.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>This cut shows the condition of the safe and office of the State Bank of Stephen, Minn., after being wrecked by dynamite.  This was done by three men.  One escaped, one gave state's evidence and the other is now serving a term at the Minnesota State Prison.</head>
<figDesc>Dynamited Safe, Stephen, Minn.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/wardenof.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Warden's Office</head>
<figDesc>Warden's Office</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">DIMINUTION OF SENTENCE</head>
<p>
The following law will give the reader an idea of the 
<q>good time</q> the prisoner earns during imprisonment, and 
is another powerful incentive toward good conduct. Few 
prisoners permit themselves to commit violations of rules, 
the gravity of which subjects them to punishment. A 
man may be deprived of good time for refusing to obey 
an order, fighting, insolence to guard, foreman or fellow-prisoner.
</p>
<p>
<emph rend="font-variant: bold">Diminution of Sentence.</emph>&mdash;Every convict sentenced for a 
definite term other than life, whether confined in the state 
prison or on parole therefrom, may diminish such term as 
follows: 
</p>
<list type="ordered">
<item>
For each month, commencing on the day of his arrival, 
during which he has not violated any prison rule or discipline, 
and has labored with diligence and fidelity, five days. 
</item>
<item>
After one year of such conduct, seven days for each month. 
</item>
<item>
After two years of such conduct, nine days for each month. 
</item>
<pb n="72" />
<item>
After three years, ten days for each month for the entire 
time thereafter. 
</item>
</list>
<p>
Said board, in view of the aggravated nature and frequency 
of offenses, may take away any or all of the good time previously gained, and, in consideration of mitigating circumstances 
or ignorance on the part of the convict, may afterwards restore 
him, in whole or in part, to the standing he possessed before 
such good time was taken away. Whenever a convict shall pass 
the entire period of his imprisonment without an unexcused 
violation of the rules or discipline, upon his discharge he shall 
be restored to his rights and privileges forfeited by conviction, 
and receive from the governor a certificate, under the seal of 
the state, as evidence of such restoration 
</p>
</div>



<div>
<head type="sub">DISCHARGE ALLOWANCE</head>
<p>
In some states there is little or no provision for aiding 
the discharged prisoner, and in some states when parole 
is granted his prospective employer must first send railroad fare before he is released. In many states the discharged man is given five dollars in money, while in 
others he is permitted to earn money during his imprisonment. The following is the law that governs in the 
state of Minnesota: 
</p>
<p>
Upon discharge the Warden, at the expense of the state, shall 
furnish each convict released with one good, serviceable suit of 
clothing and underclothing, and, when released between October 
1 and March 31 following, with a good, serviceable overcoat; 
and he shall pay to each convict, when released, $25 in money 
drawn from the current expense fund. 
</p>

<figure url="images/decop181.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<figDesc>Decoration: Keys, Ball and Chain</figDesc>
</figure>
</div>



<pb n="73" />


<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">THE CELLHOUSE BUILDING</head>
<p>
Within the cellhouse building there are 664 cells, 
ranged tier upon tier, there being six in all. The building is constructed entirely of iron and stone, and the
walls are nearly three feet thick. It is safe to say that
in this solidly built building more human sorrow is
represented than anywhere else in the state. If an
authentic record could be made of the tragedies that take 
place behind these grim, unsympathetic stone walls it
would fill volumes. However, it would require the
enviable intellect of a Victor Hugo or Charles Read to 
vividly picture the utter despair and blasted hopes of the
many thousands who have been imprisoned within these 
cheerless walls since the construction of the building. 
It is absolutely fireproof, but quite antiquated, the 
sanitation and ventilation being extremely poor. About
fifteen prisoners are employed in the cell house, sweeping 
cells, galleries, passing out water, holystoning the flags
in the corridor and keeping the place as clean as possible. 
Two men are constantly employed in whitewashing the
cells and the interior of the cell house, and another's time
is wholly occupied in exterminating bedbugs, which are
quite plentiful and possess large appetites. 
</p>
<p>
The captain makes a tour of the galleries each 
morning and inspects each cell to see that everything is in 
order. If a cell floor or other articles are in a slovenly
condition the inmate is reported to the deputy warden, 
whose duty it is to administer a reprimand for 
negligence. While making this four of inspection he delivers
all incoming letters addressed to prisoners. All 
incoming and outgoing mail is carefully scrutinized before
delivery. On Sunday morning material for writing letters
<pb n="74" />
is issued to all prisoners who are permitted to write, and 
the distribution of tobacco is also made at this time. 
The upper tiers of the galleries used to be the rendezvous for inmates possessing suicidal inclinations, not a 
few of whom, having lost all courage and lacking the 
determination to live, chose this method of ending their 
woes. We use the words <q>used to be</q> advisedly, for they 
have ceased to be an attraction to the death-desiring since 
the failure to accomplish the result occurred to an inmate 
who a short time ago took the plunge from the upper 
tier. In an hour or so he was at work as if nothing unusual had happened. Heretofore a plunge from the 
upper tiers to the stone flags always meant a call for the 
undertaker. 
</p>

<figure url="images/celleast.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Cellhouse, Looking East</head>
<figDesc>Cellhouse, Looking East</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/band2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prison Band</head>
<figDesc>Prison Band</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/spinrm1.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Spinning Room In Twine Factory looking West.</head>
<figDesc>Spinning Room In Twine Factory looking West.</figDesc>
</figure>
 


<figure url="images/spinrm2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Spinning Room In Twine Factory looking East. </head>
<figDesc>Spinning Room In Twine Factory looking East. </figDesc>
</figure>
</div>

<pb n="75" />
<pb n="76" />
<pb n="77" />

<div>
<head type="sub">THE CHAUTAUQUA CIRCLE</head>
<p>
There is in existence in the Minnesota State Prison a 
Chautauqua circle, being a branch of the main organization, conducted entirely by the inmates and the presiding officers elected from the members thereof. 
</p>
<p>
Election of officers occurs once a year. Meetings are 
held fortnightly in the prison chapel, at which time several papers are read and discussed by the members. At 
the conclusion of the meeting a critic chosen from the 
circle reviews the program, points out various errors 
in composition papers or commends them as the case 
may be.
</p>
<p>
The membership of this unique organization numbers 
about thirty, and as old members withdraw new ones are 
selected from the better educated prisoners. Meetings 
are always conducted in an orderly manner, not a snigle serious violation of the rules having occurred since 
the organization&mdash;about twenty years ago. Discussions 
at times becomes exceedingly spirited, especially if a 
paper is read that attacks the pet hobbies of the several 
members. 
</p>
<p>
As an educational feature of the institution the Chautauqua circle is accomplishing excellent work and deserves the sincere patronage and commendation of the 
prison authorities. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">BAND AND ORCHESTRA</head>
<p>
Like the majority of the better-class prisons, Minnesota's penitentiary has the honor of having within its walls 
a well-equipped band and orchestra. They are in charge 
of an experienced citizen-music teacher, and have made 
<pb n="78" />
remarkable progress since organization. About nineteen members compose the band, mostly men who have 
a long time to serve. 
</p>
<p>
The orchestra provides music for the services in the 
prison chapel, and when entertainments are given provides the musical numbers on the program. Of late 
years it has attained a degree of efficiency that has been 
commended very highly by prominent visitors to the institution. 
</p>
<p>
The band gives a concert each morning during the 
summer months and also during drill exercises, which 
take place in the yard every Sunday immediately after 
chapel service. Concerts are also given in the park on 
holidays, when the men are enjoying outdoor freedom, 
which the inmates appreciate very much, helping wonderfully to break the dull, routine monotony of prison 
life. The band and orchestra cost the state very little, 
its instruments are paid for out of the fees received from 
visitors, who pay a twenty-five cent admission to see the 
institution. This amount is donated for the benefit of 
the library fund. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">PRISON NIGHT SCHOOL</head>
<p>
The prison that now neglects to provide suitable educational facilities for the instruction of its inmates is 
considered behind the times. A great many inmates of 
penitentiaries are illiterate, and the prison night schools 
afford an excellent opportunity to acquire the fundamentals of a good education. This department is under the 
supervision of the superintendent of public schools of 
Stillwater, who is assisted by a corps of teachers chosen 
from among the inmates. The course of study 
<pb n="79" />
corresponds to the course pursued in the state primary and 
grammar schools. There are fourteen classes, ranging 
from a, b, c class to one in advanced bookkeeping. Three 
sessions are held weekly, and the school is popular among 
the prisoners. Those serving reformatory sentences are 
compelled to attend, but the voluntary attendance is always in excess of the compulsory. During the season 
of 1907-08 the average attendance was 164, and of this 
number 48 were compelled to attend, while the balance, 
116, attended voluntarily. 
</p>
<p>
The prison night school is in operation eight months 
during the year, and is well partronized, many inmates 
receiving their first instructions in reading and writing 
during their period of service. To the ambitious man 
there is plenty of opportunity for self-improvement, so 
it can readily be seen that no one need wholly waste the 
time that he is compelled to serve for infraction of state 
laws. When school is not in session inmates are granted permission to have all the school books they require 
in pursuance of studies. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE SHOE INDUSTRY.</head>
<p>
This factory is conducted by the Western Shoe Co., 
and annually employs about 225 prisoners. There is an 
excellent opportunity here for the inmate to learn a 
trade at which he can make a good living upon his release. Few citizens are employed at this work, but a 
competent citizen-foreman is in charge of each shop. 
As far as possible prisoners are taught the business of 
making shoes, and many of them become very proficient 
at this work. 
</p>
<p>
The company pays a stated price for each piece of 
<pb n="80" />
work turned out, and the per diem earnings of the prisoners is larger than in any other prison in the country. 
The volume of business of these two industries amounts 
annually to more than $2,000,000. Of this total, returns 
from the twine factory, operated on state account, amount 
to $1,300,000, while the shoe company, operated on the 
piece-price system, does a business in excess of $800,000. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE REPAIR SHOP.</head>
<p>
All the repair work of the institution is performed in 
this department, and in this shop are located the tinner, 
plumbers, carpenters, painters, machinists, etc., all under 
the supervision of a first-class foreman. The tinner 
makes all the tinware used in the various departments 
of the prison and attends to its repairing. As the entire 
institution is heated by steam, the plumbers are kept constantly employed during the winter repairing radiators 
and overhauling wornout steam pipes. As repairs and 
improvements are constantly being made and as the 
prison buildings are quite old, considerable carpenter 
work is also necessitated each year. 
</p>
<p>
Perhaps the busiest men in this shop are the machinists, whose business it is to see that all machinery, shafting, etc., are kept in repair, thus reducing breakdowns 
to the minimum. This shop is run in an economical 
manner and annually saves the state thousands of dollars. 
</p>
</div>



<div>
<head type="sub">TAILOR SHOP</head>
<p>
In this department is located the tailor shop, laundry 
and bath room, about twenty prisoners being constantly 
employed in the former, making and repairing clothing 
<pb n="81" />
<pb n="82" />
<pb n="83" />
for the inmates; the second and third rooms, of course, 
are devoted to washing and drying of clothes and bathing of prisoners. As there are about 700 prisoners 
whose clothing must be mended and washed each week, 
the employes of this shop find all the work they wish 
to do. 
</p>

<figure url="images/shoeshop.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prisoners at Work in Shoe Shop</head>
<figDesc>Prisoners at Work in Shoe Shop</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/tailor.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Tailor Shop</head>
<figDesc>Tailor Shop</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/laundry.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Laundry</head>
<figDesc>Laundry</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>


<div>
<head type="sub">BATH ROOM</head>
<p>
The bath room is located below the tailor shop in a 
two-story building. Here bathing operations are begun each Friday morning under the supervision of a 
guard, who marches the prisoners to the bath room, 
twenty-eight at a time, there being accommodations for 
only twenty-eight men, and each is provided with an 
overhead shower bath of hot or cold water. 
</p>
<p>
As the guard marches in with the men the prisoners 
remain standing in front of their shower until the attendant registers their numbers, and the guard then 
stamps his cane twice on the floor to notify the prisoners 
to begin bathing. The registered number slips are sent 
upstairs, where the inmates' clothing is kept in pigeon 
holes arranged along the walls of the laundry, each pigeon hole being labeled with the prisoner's register number, and at the expiration of his bath is hastily sent 
downstairs and placed on the small door leading to his 
stall. Each prisoner is given a clean handkerchief and 
pair of socks. 
</p>
<p>
When the men are through bathing and the guard 
again stamps twice on the floor with his cane they step 
out of the bathing booths, and at the signal the march 
back to the shop begins. It requires about fifteen minutes to bathe twenty-eight men. 
</p>
<pb n="84" />
<p>
Just in the rear of the tailor shop is a cobler, whose
duties are to repair the shoes of the inmates. All the 
shoes are bought, including the discharged clothing worn 
by the inmates, when they are relieased from prison. 
</p>
</div>


<figure url="images/chapel.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prisoners at Chapel Service on Sunday</head>
<figDesc>Prisoners at Chapel Service on Sunday</figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/bathrm.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Bath Room</head>
<figDesc>Bath Room</figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/dining.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Second Grade Dining Room, Accomodating 350 Prisoners, All of Whom are Fed in 15 Minutes</head>
<figDesc>Second Grade Dining Room, Accomodating 350 Prisoners, All of Whom are Fed in 15 Minutes</figDesc>
</figure>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE PRISON CHAPEL</head>
<p>
Religious services are conducted in the prison chapel 
each Sunday, and as previously stated, a Catholic and 
Protestant chaplain preach every alternate Sunday. The 
attendance, although voluntary, is very large, taxing the 
capacity of the chapel. Services are held at nine a. m., 
previous to which time each prisoner is asked by his 
guard whether or not he wishes to attend. 
</p>
<p>
A great many people think that, as a rule, prisoners 
are hardened sinners, not susceptible to the refining influence of the Gospel. But the facts do not justify this 
belief, for there are as many Christians in the Stillwater 
penitentiary, per population, as can be found anywhere. 
Many of the prisoners attend church every Sunday and 
are better inmates for the imbibing of moral instruction. 
</p>
<p>
The law strictly forbids the teaching of sectarian doctrines and visiting clergymen are instructed to observe this rule. 
</p>
<p>
The prison orchestra and choir, consisting of inmates, 
furnish the instrumental and vocal music for the services. 
Any inmate who wishes to consult the chaplain of the 
prison or the pastor of his particular denomination in 
regard to spiritual matters is always accorded the utmost 
liberty to do so. The chaplains also attend the sick in 
the prison hospital and conduct the burial services of 
the unfortunates who die in prison. Upon entering the 
<pb n="85" />
<pb n="86" />
<pb n="87" />
chapel the men take their places on the benches and must 
remain seated, with their arms folded and eyes to the 
front. When it is necessary to arise the deputy warden 
gives a signal and also when to be seated. The benches 
contain hymn books, and all prisoners are permitted the 
privilege of joining in the singing. 
</p>
</div>



<div>
<head type="sub">THE DINING ROOM</head>
<div>
<p>
Two of the inmates' dining rooms are located just 
above the officers' kitchen and beneath the prison chapel. 
The population of the prison, however, has increased so 
rapidly during the past few years that it was found necessary to make room for the overflow in the chapel and 
mess room opposite the officers' kitchen. One of the 
rooms in the main dining hall is devoted to first-grade 
prisoners and the other to the second grade. 
</p>
<p>
Entering the dining room, the prisoner promptly takes 
his seat and remains with his arms folded until the signal to eat is given by the deputy warden. There are six 
waiters in each dining room, and it is their business to 
see that the men are promptly served. Some pass nothing but bread, others coffee or water, and the rest attend 
to distributing the miscellaneous items on the bill of fare. 
Talking is forbidden in the dining room at all times. The 
food is very plain, but wholesome, and there is always plenty of it. The following bills of fare, one for 
the winter months and the other for summer, will give 
an idea of the food served. They were selected from the 
house steward's records and are authentic copies for 
that date: 
</p>
</div>
<pb n="88" />

<div>
<head type="sub2">PRISONERS' BILL OF FARE, WEEK ENDING JANUARY 4, 1907 </head>


<list>
<item>
SUNDAY.
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Baked pork and beans, light biscuits, <emph>syrup</emph>, 
<emph rend="font-variant: small-caps">butter</emph>, coffee.</item>
<item>Dinner: Roast beef, mashed potatoes, mashed turnips, gravy, bread, 
<emph>pickles, cake.</emph></item>
<item>Supper: Hot tea.</item>
</list> 
</item>
<item>
MONDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Fried pork sausage, potatoes, gravy, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Vegetable soup, boiled fresh beef, bread, potatoes, 
<emph>pickled beets</emph>. </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Stewed Beans</emph>, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
TUESDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Corned beef hash, syrup, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Boiled ham, cabbage, potatoes, gravy, bread, <emph>bread 
pudding</emph>.</item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Apple sauce</emph>, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
WEDNESDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Fried beef livers, potatoes, gravy, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Roast pork with dressing, mashed potatoes, gravy,
pickles, <emph>macaroni and tomatoes</emph>, bread, cake, <emph>cheese</emph>, coffee. </item>
<item>Supper: Hot tea, prunes and bread. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
THURSDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Vienna sausage, potatoes, gravy, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Roast beef, potatoes, stewed beets, gravy, bread. </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Peach sauce</emph>, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
FRIDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Fried bacon, potatoes, gravy, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Mutton stew, (potatoes, turnips and onions), bread. </item>
<item>Supper: Oat meal and milk, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
SATURDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Corned beef hash, <emph>syrup</emph>, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Boiled salt pork, potatoes, cabbage, gravy, bread,
<emph>bread pudding.</emph> </item>
<item>Supper: Hot tea, dried peaches and bread. </item>
</list>
</item>
</list>
</div>

<pb n="89" />

<div>
<head type="sub2">WEEK ENDING JULY 4, 1908.</head>
<list>
<item>
SUNDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Baked pork and beans, light biscuits, <emph>syrup</emph>, 
<emph rend="font-variant: small-caps">butter</emph>, coffee.</item> 
<item>Dinner: Roast beef, mashed potatoes, gravy, rice and tomatoes, radishes, bread, cake. </item>
<item>Supper: Hot tea with sugar. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
MONDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Bologna sausage, <emph>green onions</emph>, potatoes, 
bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Boiled ham, potatoes, hominy, gravy, bread, 
<emph>bread pudding</emph>. </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Stewed beans</emph>, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
TUESDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Corned beef hash, <emph>syrup</emph>, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Roast beef, potatoes, gravy, stewed peas, bread. </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Prune sauce</emph>, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
WEDNESDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Fried pork sausage, potatoes, gravy, bread.</item> 
<item>Dinner: Mutton stew, (potatoes, turnips and onions). </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Rice and syrup</emph>, white and graham bread, tea. </item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
THURSDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Vienna sausage, potatoes, gravy, bread, coffee.</item>
<item>Dinner: Roast beef, potatoes, baked pork and beans, 
bread. </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Pie plant sauce</emph>, white and graham bread, tea.</item> 
</list>
</item>
<item>
FRIDAY
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Fried bacon, potatoes, gravy, bread, coffee.</item>
<item>Dinner: Boiled salt pork, potatoes, gravy, <emph>spinach</emph>, 
bread pudding. </item>
<item>Supper: <emph>Oat meal and milk</emph>, white and graham bread, tea.</item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
SATURDAY. 
<list>
<item>Breakfast: Corned beef hash, <emph>syrup</emph>, bread, coffee. </item>
<item>Dinner: Roast veal with dressing, mashed potatoes, 
beans, gravy, bread, <emph>radishes, apple pie, cheese, cake,</emph> lemonade. </item>
<item>Supper: Hot tea, stewed peas and bread. </item>
</list>
</item>
</list>
</div>

<pb n="90" />
<div>
<p>
The items in italics are served to first and second 
grade only. Items in small caps are served to the first 
grade only. Third-grade prisoners are required to eat 
in their cells and are not allowed in the dining room 
while in that grade. 
</p>
<p>
On holidays, especially Thanksgiving, Christmas and 
New Years, an excellent meal is served to every inmate 
in the institution, and they are allowed on all legal holidays to spend three hours 
in the prison park where they 
are given the privilege of talking. 
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE IMPLEMENT FACTORY</head>
<p>
At present, although still in embryo, there is in the 
Stillwater penitentiary a factory devoted exclusively to 
the manufacture of rakes, mowers and binders, but this 
branch is just emerging from the experimental stage and 
may require a year or two to reach a scale large enough 
to supply the needs of the Minnesota farmers. 
</p>
<p>
This factory is in charge of Supt. Downing, an
experienced machine man, with years of experience in this 
kind of work. At present all preliminary work is being 
carried out and field tasks made with the machines. 
These machines had to be constructed along entirely new 
lines so as not to infringe patent rights controlled by the 
harvester trust. An appropriate name has been chosen 
for the binders,&mdash;<q>The Minnesota.</q> 
</p>
<p>
The legislature of this state has been very liberal in 
supplying the farmers with cheap twine, rakes, mowers 
and binders, and, it is presumed that as soon as some 
trust controls the price of wagons these, too, will be made 
by convict labor at greatly reduced prices. 
</p>
</div>
<pb n="91" />

<div>
<head type="sub">PRISON LIBRARY</head>
<p>
The inmates of the Minnesota State Prison have a fine 
library of about 6,000 volumes at their disposal, and it is 
well patronized. The books have been carefully selected, 
and all those of a suggestive nature or of the
<q>Dead-Eye-Dick</q> variety have been excluded. Here are many 
volumes pertaining to history, biography, science, art and fiction,
 bound magazines, poetry, reference books, etc. However,
 the intellectual pabulum mostly preferred by the inmates
 is fiction and bound magazines. The state subscribes
 for all the best magazines, and, after they have 
been withdrawn from circulation, they are sent to the 
bindery, bound and later listed in the catalogue ready for 
reissue among the prisoners. 
</p>
<p>
There are two prisoners employed in the library who 
circulate the books and papers among the inmates. The 
prison has what is known as an <q>exchange box.</q> All 
papers and magazines subscribed for by inmates are
permitted to be exchanged for others. Papers circulate ten 
days from date of issue, and magazines thirty days. For 
instance, a prisoner subscribes for the Weekly Dial; 
after he has read it he can place five or six of his friends' 
numbers on the margin thereof and then drop it in the 
exchange box in the morning as he comes down the 
main stairway to work. It is the duty of the librarian 
to see that such papers and magazines are delivered to 
the room numbers indicated. When the first man has 
finished the paper he erases his number and again places 
it in the exchange box. This procedure is continued 
until the last number has been reached or until the
prescribed limit that it has to circulate has expired. 
</p>
<p>
Every inmate in the institution is given a library
<pb n="92" />
catalogue and permitted to draw out two books a week. 
He is his own free agent in the selection of books, 
receiving just what he has ordered on his library slips. 
These slips contain the numbers of the books selected by 
him and are gathered up by the night guards. If an 
inmate mutilates a book he is denied the privilege of the 
library. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE MIRROR OFFICE</head>
<p>
The Prison Mirror, with the exception of the 
Summary, published at the Elmira reformatory, is the oldest 
institutional paper in the country. It is also the only 
paper exclusively managed by prisoners, all other penal 
and reformatory periodicals being conducted by a high-salaried superintendent or else the policy is under the 
supervision of the chaplain. 
</p>
<p>
The Mirror is issued each Thursday, has a circulation 
of about 1,500, and is distributed free to the inmates of 
the institution, who are permitted to send the same to 
relatives or friends free of charge The subscription 
price to the general public is &#36;1.00, and it goes to nearly 
every state in the Union. 
</p>
<p>
This publication is edited and managed by a prisoner, 
who has full charge of the printing department. Each 
Wednesday chase proofs of the following day's issue are 
submitted to the warden for approval, but he is rarely 
called upon to exercise his censorship, as the editor is 
instructed to eliminate all personalities and sensational 
topics. 
</p>

<figure url="images/editor.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Editor's Room, Prison Mirror</head>
<figDesc>Editor's Room, Prison Mirror</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/composi.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Composing Room, Prison Mirror</head>
<figDesc>Composing Room, Prison Mirror</figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/library.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Library</head>
<figDesc>Library</figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/warddini.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Warden's Dining Room </head>
<figDesc>Warden's Dining Room </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
Any inmate can contribute articles to the Mirror, 
which, if found satisfactory upon being carefully 
examined by the editor, are published. Quite a number 
<pb n="93" />
<pb n="94" />
<pb n="95" />
of the inmates are very competent writers, contributing 
regularly to the columns of their home paper. 
</p>
<p>
This bright little publication was founded in 1887 by 
the prisoners. 
</p>
<p>
For the benefit of those who have never seen this 
paper, we select at random the following extracts written 
by prisoners: 
</p>
<p>
<q>It makes a batsman hot to have the pitcher fan him.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>The only prisoners in this place who have a pull are the barbers.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>A New Year's resolution will not keep by preserving it in alcohol.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>The wife of a big-mitt politician always wears imported kid 
gloves.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>When a mouse hoves in sight, a woman acts as if she had rats 
in her garret.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Sometimes the lady pickpocket will faint in your arms in order 
to pull your leg.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>It makes a man awful hot under the collar to accuse him of 
having cold feet.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>A Stillwater girl is so modest that she cannot take the 
pajamas off a murphy without blushing.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>A boose fighter usually continues to take his little drop until 
the big drop of&mdash;five feet or more.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>In a game of freeze out Thanksgiving afternoon I got cold 
feet when some one raised six windows.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>When a woman becomes afflicted with St. Vitus dance it generally 
goes to her tongue instead of her feet.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Just because a boy can grow a baseball mustache is no reason 
why a saloon keeper should sell him a highball.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>I do not know whether there are any lady <q>bugs</q> in here or 
not, but there are quite a number of the other sex.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q><q>Y is the Fourth of July. J is the first, u is the second, l is 
the third and y is the fourth&mdash;of July.</q> Marvelous!</q> 
<pb n="96" />
</p>
<p>
<q>Count Boni has taken part in many duels, but the only thing 
he ever killed was the goose that laid the golden egg.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>The trial judge hit me so hard that I not only saw stars, but 
have been seeing stripes ever since he landed on me.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>A writer says that there is no room in this country for 
anarchists. But I think we could find room for a few in here.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>The one who cherishes the picture of his or her mother is 
scarcely beyond hope, no matter how far from the narrow path.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>It is admitted that the tariff is the mother of trusts, but their 
papa, like the father of John D. Rockefeller, is clouded in mystery.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>The people of Pennsylvania are now convinced that the 
contractor who built the bootblack stand in the capitol is a polished 
rascal.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>When the courts register a fine against Standard oil, John D. 
chalks it down on a piece of ice and then places the ice where the 
sun will strike it.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>With a few expert trainers and Governor Johnson for jockey 
the meek-eyed mule is apt to show his heels to all competitors in 
the presidential race of 1912.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Throw a few ponies of whiskey into a young man who does 
not possess horse sense, then arm him with a Colt pistol, and he 
will make an ass out of himself.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>A French count, who is not throwing his feet under the dining 
room table as often as he would like to, will soon sail for this 
country where he expects to cop out another meal ticket.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>In pleading his own case a prisoner in a western state quoted 
from Shakespeare and was rapped down by his honor who said 
that no eastern boo-gang talk would be tolerated in his court.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>It is not near so disgusting to see a man with a little streamlet 
of tobacco juice wending its way through his chinwoodlets, 
as to see a woman chewing snuff and the rag at the same 
time.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>When I went to sharpen my knife the other day in the cutting 
room I noticed a big mosquito on the frame of the grinding stone. 
He was evidently getting his proboscis in shape for the peek-a-boo season.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Eddie Foy, the famous comedian, used to sing, <q>There are 
<pb n="97" />
Moments When One Wants to be Alone.</q> This is the place for 
that Eddie. You need not look any farther or advertise
Morning Telegra(w)ph.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Out of of a total number of one hundred and twenty-six
tramps arrested in Philadelphia the other day, eighty-seven of
them were baby carriage mechanics. The new woman has put
this industry on the bum.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>One of the inmates who is doing time for horse stealing, had
a serious case of nightmare the other evening, Evidently he
imagined he was again handling horses on the range and
sheriff was gaining on him.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q><q>I am pleased to note,</q> said Tailor Nelson, <q>The Mirror is
keeping in touch with the latest sartorial fashions in this 
institution through this department. Coats will be worn longer by
some than others is all I can say at this time.</q></q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Uncle Sam is not seeking trouble, but he is something like
the Irishman who threw his bonnet on a barroom floor and
shouted, I am not looking for a fight, but there is going to be one 
if there is a man in the house who dares to jump on that old hat.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>A big longshoreman in New Orleans by the name of Tim
O'Keefe has challenged Jack Johnson to a rough and tumble
fight. Tim has a hand as big as a ham and when unloading a
vessel he uses a three hundred pound bale of cotton for a
shoulder pad.</q>
</p>
<p> 
<q>A woman in the east recently made her pet dog a
present of a diamond collar that cost two thousand, five hundred
dollars. Now I have reformed, still if I were hungry and did not
have the price of a meal, I would be tempted to sandbag Fido for
his sparks.</q> 
</p>
<p> 
<q>Cal, the sorter in shop H, who is an old sea dog himself, says 
that the only practical experience Sin Bad and other local
fishermen ever had in the whaling line was throwing the harpoon into 
one of these miniature whales that are habitats of Liver Brown's
free lunch counter.</q> 
</p>
<p> 
<q>One of the villagers here who has been accustomed to having
a liquid nightcap before entering upon his nocturnal visits to
Morpheus says he is compelled to have a nightcap here just before
retiring&mdash;and therefore he wears one&mdash;made up of a towel.  His 
imagination does the rest.</q> 
</p>

<pb n="98" />
<p> 
There are six men employed in the print shop the year 
around. This includes the editor, the pressman, job 
man and three compositors. At times, when printers 
are rather scarce, it is necessary to break in a new 
man. Some of the men who learned the printing 
business in this shop have followed up and are successful at 
the trade. The mechanical work is performed entirely 
by prisoners, but the printing itself is sent to a 
downtown press. It is expected that a first-class press will 
be installed in this department in the near future, which 
will prove highly economical. 
</p>
<p>
The Mirror department prints all the stationery used 
at the prison. This item alone contributes a large 
saving to the state each year. The job work is all of a 
superior quality and in as good form as could be done 
in any outside first-class office. All the press work is 
done on an eight-by-twelve Gordon press, but it is now 
entirely too small for the size and amount of work performed. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE BINDERY</head>
<p>
There is a bindery department in connection with the 
Mirror office and the prison library in charge of a life 
prisoner, who learned the business while in the
institution from a well qualified short-time inmate. He
repairs all the library books, binds the state magazines and 
attends to the binding of all the printed books, blank 
forms, etc., issued in the print shop. He is frequently 
called upon to bind books and magazines for the various 
state institutions, is a very competent man and performs 
his work in a neat and durable manner. 
</p>


<figure url="images/bindery.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>The Bindery</head>
<figDesc>The Bindery</figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/tobacco.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Manufacturing Tobacco for Prisoners, Steward Alexander in Background</head>
<figDesc>Manufacturing Tobacco for Prisoners, Steward Alexander in Background</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/greenhous.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Sinbad's Greenhouse</head>
<figDesc>Sinbad's Greenhouse</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>



<pb n="99" />
<pb n="100" />
<pb n="101" />
<div>
<head type="sub">THE STEWARD'S OFFICE </head>
<p>
The steward's office is in charge of Mr. T. W. 
Alexander, a man who has had at least twenty-five years' 
experience in institutional work, well qualified to fill the 
position of chief steward of the prison. All supplies are 
ordered for the prison through this department and upon 
receipt are carefully checked to ascertain if they comply 
with specifications. 
</p>
<p>
Supplies are issued from this departemnt on the 5th, 
15th and 25th of each month, the heads of the several 
departments making out requisitions therefor,
countersigned by the warden. Prison supplies are purchased 
quarterly through the State Board of Control. 
Whenever any articles are issued to a department duplicate 
vouchers are made out, one retained by the steward and 
the other signed by the recipient and forwarded to the 
State Board of Control. 
</p>
<p>
The chief steward has charge of the officers' quarters 
and the administration building, and sees that they are 
kept clean and in proper order. He is responsible for 
all the property under his charge. 
</p>
</div>


<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">THE FEMALE WARD</head>
<p>
On an average there are ten females in the matron's 
ward. This department is located above the
administration quarters, and is entirely separated from the cell 
house; it is impossible for the occupants of the latter to 
communicate with the former. 
</p>
<p>
The women's ward is presided over by Miss McKinney,
 who has been in charge for many years. The rules 
governing women prisoners are not nearly as strict as 
<pb n="102" />
those pertaining to the men. Their food, also, is of a 
better quality. In the summer they are permitted to 
take outdoor exercise each evening during good behavior. 
The women prisoners are subject to the grading system 
and also receive the benefit of the parole law. If they 
wish to do so they can attend chapel service every
Sunday morning. Their work is not very arduous, being 
mainly confined to keeping the officers' rooms in a neat 
and orderly condition. 
</p>

<figure url="images/matron.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Matron's Apartment</head>
<figDesc>Matron's Apartment</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/womnouti.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Women Inmates Outing on Holiday</head>
<figDesc>Women Inmates Outing on Holiday</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/sewing.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Female Department&mdash;Sewing Room </head>
<figDesc>Female Department&mdash;Sewing Room</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/womncell.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Female Department&mdash;Women's Cells</head>
<figDesc>Female Department&mdash;Women's Cells</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE GREENHOUSE</head>
<p>
 A large greenhouse is located in the western end of 
the prison yard, just opposite the prison hospital,
presided over by a life prisoner who has been there over 
eighteen years. By the boys of the institution he is 
known as <q>Sindbad the Sailor,</q> having spent many years 
on the high seas before the mast in the merchant marine, 
on board of whalers and in the old navy. 
</p>
<p>
The greenhouse supplies flowers for decorating the 
lawns and park, cut flowers for the hospital inmates, the 
officers' and guards' mess rooms and the room used by 
the members of the State Board of Control on their 
monthly visits to the prison. When Sindbad becomes 
lonely for the wash of the sea waves his assistant throws 
a few buckets of water against the side of the
greenhouse and he exercises his imagination for the rest.
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE POWER HOUSE</head>
<p>
The engine room is located on the main street of the 
institution, and it is here that power is generated for 
driving the immense lines of shafting that radiate through 
<pb n="103" />
<pb n="104" />
<pb n="105" />
the several departments. The power plant is in charge of 
a chief engineer and several inmate assistants, two of 
whom are life prisoners, one having charge of the big
engine and the other attending to the electric light plant. 
Both men are under considerable responsibility, but they 
are conscientious workers and have little difficulty in
performing their duties satisfactorily.
</p>
<p>
The chief engineer has charge of the automatic
sprinkling plant, engine, steam heating, ventilating, cooking, 
electric light plant, water supply and all the machinery 
pertaining thereto. Each of the cells contains an eight-candle
power lamp, and the shops and streets are 
provided with electric lights so that the inmates can see to 
work during the winter months. As they are employed 
from seven in the morning until six in the evening the 
year around, lights are often necessitated. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">THE PRISON FIRE DEPARTMENT</head>
<p>
It is not generally known, but, nevertheless, the prison 
maintains a well organized fire department. This
brigade is not a large one, but as a first aid in case of
necessity it is equipped to do efficient service. 
</p>
<p>
There are eight prisoners on the day shift and the 
same on the night crew. The fire alarm system of the 
prison is as nearly perfect as human ingenuity can
devise. There are two hose carts, and frequent
experimental runs are made in order to keep the department to 
a high state of efficiency. At these runs the men go to 
the fire house, take out the hose carts and make as quick 
time as possible to the nearest hydrant where the
supposed fire exists, the hose is attached and all
preparations made as if a real fire were under way. 
</p>
<pb n="106" />
<p>
Occasionally a general night alarm is sent in, and 
when this occurs all the guards residing at the prison 
must respond promptly. The warden and deputy warden 
also respond to a general night alarm. Since the big 
fire of twenty-five years ago, and that which consumed 
the large paint shop occupied by the Minnesota Thresher 
Co., about eighteen years ago, there have been no
conflagrations within the prison grounds. This, in a great 
measure, is due to the vigilance exercised in each
department in regard to leaving refuse and inflammable
material lying around. 
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">RULES GOVERNING DISCIPLINE.</head>
<p>
Your attention is directed to the following rules. Only by 
observing and obeying them can you make a good record as a 
prisoner and become eligible for parole and the diminution of your 
sentence which the law allows: 
</p>
<list type="ordered">
<item> Your first duty is strict obedience to all rules and
regulations and any orders of the officer under whose charge you 
may be placed.</item>

<item>You must observe strict silence in all departments of the 
prison and while marching through the yard.</item>

<item>You must not speak to, give or receive from visitors
anything except by permission of the Warden or Deputy Warden. 
Gazing at visitors or strangers passing through the prison is 
strictly forbidden.</item>

<item>You are expected to apply yourself diligently at whatever 
labor you are assigned, and, after reasonable teaching, to perform 
the same amount of work as would be required from you as a 
citizen.</item>

<item>At every signal to fall in for marching take your place in 
line promptly. March with military step, attend to and
promptly obey the orders of your officer. </item>

<item>You will be required to keep your person clean and your 
clothing tidy and in good order. You must not make any
alterations in your clothing or cut your shoes; if they do not fit 
<pb n="107" />
<pb n="108" />
<pb n="109" />
or need repairs report the fact to your officer. You must not
carry knives, tools of any kind, pencil, paper or any material
whatever from your shop to your cell without permission in 
writing from the Warden or Deputy Warden. Finding 
these things in your possession will be considered proof that
you have violated this rule. Tinkering or writing notes to other 
convicts or carrying notes from one convict to another is strictly
forbidden. </item>

<item>You are not allowed to have any money on your person
or in your possession, neither are you permitted to trade or 
purchase any article whatever. All of your business must be
done through the Warden. </item>

<item>You must approach an officer in a respectful manner. 
Always salute him before speaking. You must confine your
conversation with him strictly to the business in hand. You must
not address an officer on matters outside the prison. Insolence
in any form to an officer, foreman, or even to a fellow convict
will not be tolerated, </item>

<item>On entering the cell house, office of the Board of Control,
Warden or Deputy Warden you must uncover unless your duties 
are such that you have special permission to remain covered.</item>
</list>

<figure url="images/decoday.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Audience Looking Down on Prisoners in Prison Park, Decoration Day, 1909</head>
<figDesc>Audience Looking Down on Prisoners in Prison Park, Decoration Day, 1909</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/decoday2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Prisoners in Prison Park, Decoration Day, 1909. On holidays They Have the Privilege of Talking.</head>
<figDesc>Prisoners in Prison Park, Decoration Day, 1909</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">PRIVILEGES</head>
<p>
You are not compelled to attend service, but you are specially
requested to do so, believing that the moral support of religeous
instruction is necessary to all. 
</p>
<p>
You are required to bathe once a week in summer, once in
two weeks in winter, and oftener if considered necessary by the 
prison Physician unless excused by him, the Warden or 
Warden.
</p>
<p>
On entering the prison you will receive three (3) tickets
entitling you to the following privileges as long as you obey
strictly all the rules of the prison:
</p>
<list>
<item>
First. One ration of tobacco each week. 
</item>
<item>
Second. Permission to write under grade rules. 
</item>
<item>
Third. Permission to see friends once in four weeks. 
</item>
<item>
NEWSPAPERS. You are permitted to receive such weekly
<pb n="110" />
papers as the Warden may approve. No daily papers or sensational
publications of any description will be admitted. 
</item>
<item>
EXTRA LETTERS. Written permission must be obtained from 
the Warden or Deputy Warden in case it becomes necessary to 
write special letters. 
</item>
<item>
MAIL MATTERS. Letters and papers of every description must 
be examined at the office under the direction of the Warden 
before being mailed or delivered. 
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">SHOP RULES</head>
<list type="ordered">
<item>
On entering the shop you will take off your coat, put on 
your apron and get at your work promptly. If you have any 
cause for complaint, whether from keeper, foreman or others 
you will be allowed to send application for an interview through 
your officer at any time to the Board of Control, Warden or 
Deputy Warden. 
</item>
<item>
Communications between prisoners is strictly prohibited 
and will not be allowed at any time except by special permission 
of the officers in charge, and then only when absolutely necessary. 
</item>
<item>
In talking with your foreman you are required to confine 
yourself strictly to your shop duties. You will not be allowed 
to talk with him upon matters pertaining to outside news. 
</item>
<item>
You will be required to approach your officer in a
respectful manner. Always salute him before addressing him and 
make your wants known as briefly as possible. 
</item>
<item>
You will be required to give your individual attention to 
your work. Gazing about at visitors passing through the shop 
or at other prisoners will not be allowed. You must
respectfully listen to and faithfully carry out all instructions given you 
by your foreman pertaining to your work. 
</item>
<item>
You will not be allowed to leave your place of work
except by permission of the officer in charge. 
</item>
<item>
You will not be allowed to brush against a fellow convict 
in passing, to get in each other's way or otherwise trespass 
upon the rights of each other so as to provoke illfeeling. 
</item>
<item>
Careless or wilful injury of your work or tools will be 
promptly reported. 
</item>
<pb n="111" />
<item>
You must always salute an officer on entering or retiring 
from your shop. You will not be permitted to leave shop or 
place of work under any circumstances without first obtaining 
special permission of the officer in charge. 
</item>
<item>
If you are sick or unable to work report the fact to your 
officer and act as he may direct. If you desire to see the Physician
give your name to your officer immediately after entering 
the shop in the morning. 
</item>
<item>
All trading or bartering of whatsoever kind between prisoners
or between citizens and prisoners is strictly prohibited. 
You will not be allowed to give or receive any present or gift 
from a foreman or citizen under any condition. 
</item>
<item>
If it becomes necesary to use a lead pencil about your 
work apply to your officer, who will supply you. Pencil must 
invariably be returned to the officer every evening. You will 
not be allowed to cut off or appropriate any part of pencil. 
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">DINING HALL RULES</head>
<list type="ordered">
<item>
On entering the dining hall take your seat promptly&mdash;position
 erect&mdash;arms folded, with eyes to the front until the signal 
is given to commence eating. 
</item>
<item>
Strict silence must be observed during the meal. Staring 
at visitors, talking and laughing, fooling or gazing about the 
room is strictly forbidden. 
</item>
<item>
Eating or drinking before or after the gong sounds, using 
vinegar in your drinking water, or putting meat on the table 
is prohibited. 
</item>
<item>
Should you desire additional food make your wants known 
to the waiters in the following manner: 
<list>
<item>
If you want bread hold up your right hand. 
</item>
<item>
Coffee or water, hold up your cup. 
</item>
<item>
Meat, your fork. 
</item>
<item>
Soup, hold up your spoon. 
</item>
<item>
Vegetables, hold up your knife.
</item>
<item>
If you desire to speak to an officer about food or service in 
dining hall hold up your left hand. 
</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>
Wasting food in any form will not be tolerated. You 
must not ask for or allow waiter to place on your plate more 
<pb n="112" />
food than you can eat. When through with meal leave pieces of 
bread unmussed on left side of plate. Crusts and small pieces 
of bread must not be left on your plate. 
</item>
<item>
After finishing your meal place knife, fork and spoon on 
right side of plate. Sit erect with arms folded. When the signal
is given to arise drop hands to your side. At the second 
signal of the gong march out and to your respective places in 
line in a prompt, quiet and orderly manner. 
</item>
<item>
In passing to and from the dining hall you must not gaze 
into cells or loiter on the gallery. Walk erect with your eyes 
to the front. It is strictly against the rules to carry out any 
of the dining hall furnishings or to carry food to or from the 
dining hall at any time except on Sundays and holidays, when 
you will be allowed to carry lunch to your cell for the evening 
meal.
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">CHAPEL RULES</head>
<list type="ordered">
<item>
On entering the chapel you will march erect with arms 
by your side, keeping step with the music. 
</item>
<item>
You will take your seat promptly as designated by the 
officers in charge and sit with arms folded during chapel service. 
</item>
<item>
The signal for rising and being seated will be the sound 
of the Deputy Warden's gavel. When this signal is given you 
will rise promptly and remain standing until notified to be 
seated. You will be allowed to drop arms to your side while 
standing. 
</item>
<item>
Strict attention must be given to the service. You must 
not gaze about the room at visitors or at fellow convicts, but 
must sit erect in your seat facing the speaker. 
</item>
<item>
Reading, spitting on the floor, shuffling of the feet or any 
other unnecessary noise is strictly forbidden. 
</item>
<item>
Should you be taken sick during service, or if it becomes 
necessary for you to retire, raise your right hand to the officer 
in charge, who will excuse you if necessary. 
</item>
<item>
After service you will sit erect with arms folded, giving 
strict attention to your officer until he gives the signal to rise, 
when you will be required to rise promptly and march out of 
the chapel as directed, keeping time with the music.
</item>
<pb n="113" />
<item>
In marching to and from the chapel you will be required 
to keep in close order with face to the front and in as quiet and 
orderly a manner as possible. 
</item>
</list>
<p>
Any wilful violation of these rules will be promptly reported, 
and severely punished if necessary to enforce compliance. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">GRADING RULES</head>
<p>
The Board of Control by virtue of the authority and power 
conferred upon them by Section 5 of an act of the Minnesota 
Legislature, entitled <q>An Act to regulate the sentencing of
prisoners convicted of felony and their subsequent release on 
parole,</q> hereby establish three (3) grades of prisoners to be 
known and designated as the First, Second and Third Grades, 
together with a system of marks to be governed by the following
rules and regulations, which shall be in force and have 
effect from and after the official notification of the passage of 
said Act is certified by the Secretary of State under date of 
April 5th, 1893. 
</p>
<p>
All prisoners on arrival shall be entered in the Second Grade; 
they may earn nine credit marks each month and shall be marked
on conduct, work and mental advancement. Promotion from 
the Second to the First Grade shall be conditioned upon the 
earning of fifty (50) out of the possible fifty-four (54) credit 
marks, within six (6) consecutive months. The loss of more 
than two (2) marks in any one month shall cause the prisoner 
so offending to be reduced to the next lower grade. By a clear 
record of one (1) month, and the earning of nine (9) credit 
marks shall entitle the prisoner to be advanced to the next upper 
grade. 
</p>
<p>
Prisoners may lose their grades: 
</p>
<list>
<item>
First. By such violations of prison rules as shall necessarily 
subject them to solitary confinement. 
</item>
<item>
Second. For general disorderly conduct. 
</item>
<item>
Third. For habitual laziness, untidiness or negligence. 
</item>
</list>

<figure url="images/decop113.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<figDesc>decoration, p. 113</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<pb n="114" />

<div>
<head type="sub">LIBRARY RULES</head>
<p>
In ordering books the following directions must be carefully 
adhered to: 
</p>
<p>
Write plainly upon a slip of paper your name and cell number.
Underneath place the numbers of fifteen or twenty books you 
prefer to read. Always take your library book with you when 
moving from one cell to another. Bear in mind that all books 
are charged to you and that you will be held strictly responsible 
for their preservation and safe return. The catalogue and all 
books charged to you must be accounted for on the day of your 
parole or discharge from prison. You will not be allowed to 
have a library book in your possession or in your cell except 
those that have been regularly charged up and come to you 
through the regular channels. If you find a stray book in your 
cell you must turn it over to the Librarian at once. Failing to 
do this, in the event of finding a stray library book in your 
cell will be the means of depriving you of all library privileges. 
</p>
<p>
You are accorded the utmost liberty in the selection of your 
reading matter, but it is hoped and it will be expected by the 
management that the library record will show that you have 
exercised due diligence and regard for your own best interests 
in the selection of books. The Warden, Chaplains, Teachers or 
other officers will gladly advise you concerning the selection of 
proper reading matter. 
</p>
<p>
All library books, excepting books of reference, may be
retained two weeks. Books of reference may be held but one 
day.
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">RULES FOR EXCHANGING PAPERS</head>
<p>
Any person wishing to exchange papers or periodicals with 
other prisoners may do so by observing the following rules: 
</p>
<p>
Mark the numbers of the cells to which you wish to send the 
paper or periodical plainly on the margin thereof and drop it in 
the exchange box at the foot of the stairs as you go out with 
your bucket in the morning. 
</p>

<figure url="images/solitary.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Solitary Confinement Cell, with Crank Cells Opposite</head>
<figDesc>Solitary Confinement Cell, with Crank Cells Opposite</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/crankcel.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Crank Cells and Keeper</head>
<figDesc>Crank Cells and Keeper</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/solitry2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Solitary Confinement.  The Severest Mode of Punishment at the Minnesota State Prison.  Door to Right is Closed at all Times.</head>
<figDesc>Solitary Confinement.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
After reading papers sent to you scratch your number out and 
replace papers in the exchange box the following morning, but 
<pb n="115" />
<pb n="116" />
<pb n="117" />
do not add any numbers to the list nor erase any but your own. 
</p>
<p>
Weekly and semi-weekly publications circulate ten days from 
the date of their issue; monthly publications circulate the month 
of their issue. 
</p>
<p>
Writing on, drawing pictures on, or in any way defacing
exchanges is forbidden. Papers must be kept as clean as possible. 
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">RESTORATION OF CITIZENSHIP.</head>
<p>
A convict who shall pass the entire period of his imprisonment 
without a violation of the rules and discipline, except such as 
the Warden or Board of Control shall excuse, shall upon his
discharge from prison be restored to the rights and privileges
forfeited by his conviction, and shall receive from the Governor a
certificate under the great seal of the state as evidence of such 
restoration, to be issued upon presentation to the Governor of a 
certificate of such conduct, which shall be furnished to such
convict by the Warden.
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">SOLITARY CONFINEMENT.</head>
<p>
The mode of punishing infractions of the prison rules 
at the Stillwater penitentiary consists of standing the
prisoner on the inside of a cell door; putting his hands 
through the bars, and handcuffed on the outside. He is 
kept standing in this position ten hours during the day, 
and then let down during the night; is allowed only a 
single slice of bread and a cup of water each day while 
undergoing punishment. There are no beds in these 
cells, nothing but a plank on which to sleep. 
</p>
<p>
As a rule, prisoners are only kept in these punishment
cells from four to six days, and it frequently occurs 
that he is released in one day, providing he promises to 
obey the rules and will try to avoid getting into trouble 
in the future. It is not the custom to subject the inmates
of the Stillwater penitentiary to this form of punishment
for trivial offenses, but it is applied to those prisoners
who attempt to escape, who destroy property, or 
<pb n="118" />
who indulge in fights and who display a general
negligence in regard to their work. 
</p>
<p>
On entering the punishment cell the prisoner is 
searched thoroughly and given a third-grade uniform. 
After the punishment is over he is kept in the third 
grade for thirty days, and by good conduct at the end of 
that time he is admitted to the second grade. While 
in the third grade all his privileges are cut off, such as 
permission to write letters, receiving visits from friends, 
and tobacco and newspapers. 
</p>
<p>
Not very many prisoners are subjected to this form 
of punishment and it is resorted to only when all other 
means of enforcing prison discipline fails. 
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head type="sub">THE TWINE FACTORY</head>
<p>

There is a twine factory in operation in the Minnesota
State Prison having a yearly capacity of nearly 
eighteen million pounds of binder twine. This adjunct 
to the prison's industries was inaugurated about eighteen
years ago, the author of the measure being the brilliant
Ignatius Donnelly, known as the Sage of Nininger. 
At that time the farmers of this state were groaning under
the iron heel of the trust, being compelled to pay 
eighteen cents a pound for their twine, but today the 
prison is manufacturing twine of superior quality and 
selling it to the farmers at an average price of about 
seven cents per pound. 
</p>
<p>
In its infancy the twine plant was conducted on a very 
small scale, but the present management has developed 
and added to its equipment until now the factory supplies
almost the entire demand of the state. There is 
little opposition from labor unions against the employment
of prison labor in this industry, for there is but a 
small proportion of the product manufactured in this 
<pb n="119" />
<pb n="120" />
<pb n="121" />
state outside of the prison, and outside factories are 
under the domination of the Cordage Trust. 
</p>
<p>
The successful operation of Minnesota's twine plant 
has aroused the keenest interest among prison officials 
in other states, and there are now quite a number of 
similar factories operating in other penitentiaries. Delegations
of prison officials from other states are frequent
visitors at the Minnesota factory, inspecting the 
manufacture of twine, and they are invariably enthusiastic
over results attained.
</p>
<p>
The twine factory is what is known to the trade as a 
<q>three-system plant;</q> that is, it contains three complete 
sets of each of the machines necessary to convert the 
fibre into twine ready for shipment. The transformation
is effected principally by a series of combings. From 
the moment the rush-plaited cover is removed and the 
bale is opened until the long strands of fibre reach the 
spinning machines to be twisted into cord the material 
is constantly undergoing combing. 
</p>
<p>
The binder twine fibre is unloaded from the cars inside the prison yard.
It is weighed and stored in the 
warehouse until it is used. Adjoining the fibre warehouse
is the opening room in which the bales are opened 
and spread out, the kinks shaken out of the long strands 
by hand and the fibre put through a machine called a 
<q>breaker.</q> The breaker subjects it to the first course 
of raking, and in order to toughen the material and 
make it more pliable distributes a limited amount of oil 
through it. After passing through the first breaker, it is 
sent on to a second, where it is again cleaned and straightened.
Then it is removed from the opening room to the 
next shop, where it is passed through first to a coarse 
then a fine <q>spreader.</q> Like the breaker, the spreader is 
merely a steel comb on a belt. 
</p>
<pb n="122" />
<p>
After leaving the spreaders the fibre is in long, straight 
and fairly clean strands, and one would think that it 
might at once be twisted into a cord. But the combing 
process is not through yet, for in the next room it is 
sent through first a coarse and then a fine <q>draw frame,</q> 
and then is given what is technically known as a <q>third 
working</q> in a still finer one. These draw frames not 
only comb the fibre, but they also regulate the sliver&mdash;that
is, they determine how many strands of hemp will 
go to make up the finished twine. 
</p>
<p>
Next the fibre is run through a <q>finisher,</q> an almost 
human machine, which regulates more precisely than the 
draw frames the size of the sliver, and then it is ready 
for the spinning rooms. As it comes out of the spinner 
it is wrapped on huge spools, which are piled on little 
carts and distributed among the men operating the balling
machines. These latter wrap the twine into five-pound
balls, tagged and ready for baling. In the balling 
shop the twine is weighed, tested and packed in 50-pound
bales, which are sent to the twine warehouses and 
stored there, roof-high, until the harvesting commences. 
</p>
<p>
The output of the twine factory previous to 1903 
amounted to about 5,000,000 pounds, but it turned out 
about 15,000,000 pounds last season, and it is anticipated 
that this enormous increase will reach 18,000,000 in the 
near future. About 225 prisoners are employed the 
year around in this manufactury. Mr. E. C. Williams 
is the superintendent of the twine plant and is an
excellent man for the position, thoroughly understanding 
the business. Under his capable management the factory
is kept up to its highest capacity and few breakdowns
have been recorded. 
</p>


<figure url="images/preprm.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Spinning Room In Twine Factory </head>
<figDesc>Spinning Room In Twine Factory </figDesc>
</figure>


<figure url="images/baling.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Bailing and Sacking Room In Twine Factory </head>
<figDesc>Bailing and Sacking Room In Twine Factory </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/spinrm3.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Spinning Room In Twine Factory </head>
<figDesc>Spinning Room In Twine Factory </figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/dinnerma.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Convicts Marching In to Dinner </head>
<figDesc>Convicts Marching In to Dinner </figDesc>
</figure>



</div>
</div>

<pb n="123" />
<pb n="124" />
<pb n="125" />

<div rend="page-break-before: right">



<head>REAL FACTS ABOUT THE NORTHFIELD, MINNESOTA, BANK ROBBERY.</head>
<head type="sub">Related by THOMAS COLEMAN YOUNGER.<note place="foot">
<p>
Editor's Note.&mdash;In the preface we stated that the names of former inmates 
of the Minnesota State Prison with sensational reputations would not appear in 
this book. However, there has been such an arbitrary demand from the general 
public, that we have concluded to insert the version of an exploit by one of the 
early inmates of the institution. Page 49 shows hospital cell occupied by Cole 
Younger during the 25 years of his incarceration. This is the first time this 
story has been published in book form. It is surmised the names Howard and 
Woods indicate Jesse and Frank James respectively.
</p>
</note></head>

<p>
<q>In telling the story of the Northfield bank robbery
and its frightful results I have only to say that 
there is no heroism in outlawry, and that the man who 
sows is sure to reap. After Lee surrendered I tried my 
best to live at peace with the world and earn a
livelihood. I'd been made a guerrilla by a provocation that 
few men could have resisted. My father had been 
cruelly murdered, my mother had been hounded to 
death, my entire family had been tormented and 
all my relatives plundered and imprisoned.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>From the mass of rubbish that has been written 
about the guerrilla there is little surprise that the
popular conception of him should be a fiendish, blood-thirsty wretch.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/youngers.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<head>Cole Younger. In Prison Garb in Minnesota State Prison, Jan. 10, 1877 (left).  As he looked <q>going out</q>,July 14, 1901 (right).</head>
<figDesc>Cole Younger.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q>Yet he was in many cases, if not in most, a man 
who had been born to better things and who was made 
what he was by such outrages as Osceola, Palmyra 
and by a hundred raids in less famous but not less
infamous, that were made by Kansans into Missouri 
during the war.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>When the war ceased those of the guerrillas who 
were not hung or shot or pursued by posses till they 
found the hand of man turned against them at every 
<pb n="126" />
step, settled down to become good citizens in the 
peaceful walks of life, and the survivors of Quantrell's 
band may be pardoned, in view of the black paint that 
has been devoted to them, in calling attention to the 
fact that of the members of Quantrell's band who have 
since been intrusted with public place, not one has ever 
betrayed his trust.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>As for myself and brothers I wish to emphasize 
that we made an honest attempt to return to normal 
life at the close of the war, and had we been permitted
to do so the name of Younger would never have been 
connected with the crimes that were committed in the 
period immediately following the war.</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>That my life was good or clean I do not assert. 
But such as it was, it was forced upon me by conditions 
over which I had no control. Before final judgment 
is passed upon the men of my kind who were with me 
in those days I ask that the fact be considered that we 
were born in days when hatred was the rule and reared 
among scenes of violence.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>But I have been accused of many crimes of which 
I have not been guilty, and I am willing to take my 
oath that the crimes that were charged against me in 
Missouri were not mine. Never in all my life had I 
anything to do with any of the bank robberies in the 
state of Missouri which had been charged against
myself and brothers.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>In the fall of 1868 my brothers, Jim and Bob, went 
with me to Texas. The next two or three years we 
spent in an honest life, my sister joining us and keeping
house for us at Syene, Dallas county. In 1870 and 
1871 Jim was deputy sheriff in Dallas county. He and 
Bob sang in the church choir. At that time Bob, who 
<pb n="127" />
was only 17, fell in love with one of the young ladies 
in the village.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>I went down to Louisiana, and the story was 
that I killed five men and shot five others because I had
been robbed by a lot of crooked cattlemen. There is
just this much truth about this incident: There was
a crooked race, with me as the victim. After the race
I fought a duel, but not over the race.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The duel was forced upon me by a man named
Captain James White. He circulated a scandalous 
tale about the young woman Bob was in love with.
I sent word to him that he would have to apologize or 
fight. After the race I referred to White and I went
to a neighboring plantation and fought it out. At 
first shot his right arm was shattered at the shoulder.
When he thought he was dying he apologized and
admitted that he had circulated the story for the 
purpose of forcing a fight upon me.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>It was about this time that the Kansas City fair
was robbed. This was charged against the Younger 
brothers, although not one of us had anything to do
with it. Bob felt so keenly the notoriety that resulted
from my duel and from the stories of the Kansas City
robbery that he left Dallas, and later Jim and I 
followed him. About this time my brother John, 
was only 14 years old when the war closed, was forced
into a quarrel and murdered as wantonly as a man
was ever murdered in the history of the west.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>When I was on the Pacific slope Missouri adopted 
the famous Drake constitution, which prohibited
Confederate soldiers and sympathizers from practicing
any profession, preaching the gospel or doing
many other things under a penalty of a fine of not less
<pb n="128" />
than &#36;500 or imprisonment for not less than six 
months. One section of this constitution gave amnesty
to Union soldiers for all they had done after 
January 1, 1861, but held Confederates responsible for 
what they had done either as citizens or soldiers.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The result of this was persecution for all men who 
were not friendly with the carpet-bag adminstration 
following the war, and there was no mercy shown to 
any of them. After a few days of seeing my friends 
and old comrades hounded and imprisoned I saw there 
was nothing left for me to do but gather together with 
those that were left and do the best we could.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>In passing swiftly over the scenes of violence in 
which we took part, I will take up the Northfield case 
by saying that we had decided to find a good bank, 
make a big haul, get away with the money, leave the 
country and start life anew in some foreign land.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/entrain.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Convicts entering train at Stillwater bound for new prison.</head>
<figDesc>Convicts entering train at Stillwater bound for new prison.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/chaperon.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Warden Wolfer  chaperoning convicts to their new <q>home</q></head>
<figDesc>Warden Wolfer  chaperoning convicts to their new <q>home</q></figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q>We were told that General Benjamin F. Butler 
had a big lot of money in the First National bank at 
Northfield, and that A. A. Ames, son-in-law of Butler, 
who had been carpet-bag governor of Mississippi after 
the war, had a lot there also. We were not very 
friendly to Butler because of his treatment of
Southerners during the war, and accordingly decided to 
make a raid on the Northfield bank.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>My brothers, Jim and Bob, Clell Miller, Bill
Chadwell and three men named Pitts, Woods and Howard, 
were those who decided to take up the expedition. 
This was in the middle of August, and we spent a 
week in Minneapolis picking up what information we 
could about Northfield and the bank and playing
poker. Then we passed another week in St. Paul, also 
looking for information as to the amount of money 
<pb n="129" />
<pb n="130" />
<pb n="131" />
and the precautions taken in the bank to take care 
of it.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Chadwell, Pitts, Bob and myself procured horses 
at St. Peter, where we stayed long enough to break 
them and to train them for the hard riding to which 
we knew they would be submitted later on. It was 
at St. Peter that I made the acquaintance of a little 
girl who afterwards was one of the most earnest
workers for our parole.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>A little tot then, she said she could ride a horse, 
too, and reaching down, I lifted her up before me, and 
we rode up and down. I asked her her name and she 
said it was <q>Horace Greeley Perry,</q> and I replied:</q> 
</p>
<p>
<q><q>No wonder you're such a little tot with such a 
great name.</q></q>
</p>
<p>
<q><q>I won't always be little,</q> she replied. <q>I'm going 
to be a great big girl and be a newspaper man like 
papa.</q></q> 
</p>
<p>
<q>Will you still be my sweetheart then, and be my 
friend?</q> I asked her, and she declared she would, a 
promise I was to remind her of years later under
circumstances of which I did not dream then. 
</p>
<p>
<q>Many years afterward with a party of visitors to 
the prison came a girl, perhaps 16, who registered in 
full, <q>Horace Greeley Perry.</q></q>
</p>
<p>
<q>I knew there could not be two women with such 
a name in the world, and I reminded her of her
promise, a promise which she did not remember, although 
she had been told how she had made friends with the 
bold, bad man who afterwards robbed the bank at 
Northfield.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Very soon afterward, at the age of 18, I believe, 
she became, as she had dreamed, in childhood,
<pb n="132" />
<q>a newspaper man</q>, editing the St. Peter Journal, and 
to the hour of my pardon she was one of the most indefatigable workers for us.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>A few years ago failing health compelled her
removal from Minnesota to Idaho, and Minnesota lost 
one of the brightest newspaper writers and staunchest
friends that a man ever knew. Jim and I had a 
host of advocates during the latter years of our
imprisonment, but none exceeded in devotion the young 
woman, who as a little tot, had ridden unknowingly 
with the bandit who was soon to be exiled for life 
from all his kin and friends.</q>
</p>


<p>
<q>Preliminary work on the Northfield robbery was 
got down to during the last week of August 1876, and 
while Pitts and I were waiting for Bob and Chadwell, 
who had gone up there to look over the ground, we 
scouted all over the country thereabouts and around 
Madelia in order to get ourselves familiar with the 
lay of the land. When the two boys joined us we divided
into two parties and started for Northfield along 
different routes.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>On Monday night, September 4, the party I was 
with reached Le Sueur Center, where we had trouble 
finding places to sleep, as court was in session.
Tuesday night we put in at Cordova, and Wednesday we 
were in Millersburg. At the same time Bob and his 
crowd rounded up in Cannon City, which was south 
of Northfield.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>On Thursday morning, September 7, we all came 
together on the Cannon river, on the outskirts of 
Northfield. That afternoon I took a look at the bank, 
and in camp at dinner I told the gang that no matter 
what came off we mustn't shoot anybody. While I 
was making this point as strong as I could one of the 
<pb n="133" />
<pb n="134" />
<pb n="135" />
crowd asked what we should do if they began shooting at us.
Bob at once said that if I was so particular 
about not having any shooting the best thing for me 
to do was to stay outside and take my chances.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/entnewpr.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Convicts entering new prison</head>
<figDesc>Convicts entering new prison</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/entnewpr2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Convicts detraining at their new <q>home.</q></head>
<figDesc>Convicts detraining at their new <q>home.</q></figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q>Well, at last the time came. Bob, Pitts and Howard
started for town ahead, the scheme being that they 
should round up in the town square and not go into 
the bank until the rest of the party joined them. It 
was fixed that Miller and I should go on guard right 
at the bank, while the rest of the gang was to wait at 
the bridge and listen for a pistol shot signal in case 
they were wanted for help. We had it schemed out 
that as there were no saddle horses around anywhere 
we could get off with a flying start and get away
before they could stop us, wrecking the telegraph office 
if necessary to prevent any alarm being sent out by 
wire.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Whisky spoiled the whole plan. Between the 
time they left camp and reached the bridge the men 
who went ahead got away with a quart of whisky&mdash;the
first time I had ever known Bob to drink, and as a 
matter of fact, I didn't know he had done so then 
until the day and its terrible events were over. The 
blunder was that when these three men saw us coming,
instead of waiting for us to get up with them they 
slammed right on into the bank regardless, leaving the 
door open in their excitement.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>I was out in the street, pretending I was having 
trouble with my saddle. Meantime I had told Miller 
to close up the bank door. A man named Allen, who 
kept a store near by, was then trying to get into the 
bank, but Miller foolishly shouted at him and told him 
to get away. Allen at once became excited and saw 
<pb n="136" />
that something was wrong, and ran off up the street 
shouting to every one to get his gun, as the bank was 
being robbed.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>A Dr. Wheeler, who saw that something was happening
out of the ordinary, began to yell <q>Robbery!</q>
Then I saw we were in for it, and would need all the 
help we could get. I first called to Miller to come
inside and get out of harm's way and then I fired a signal
to the three men at the bridge for them to come 
up and help us, as we had been trapped.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Chadwell, Woods and Jim came galloping up, and 
at the same moment that they arrived I heard a shot 
fired inside the bank. The three boys were firing their 
guns as they rode along, shouting to everybody they 
saw to get out of the way and get indoors, but I am 
quite sure they never killed anybody. My theory
always has been that the man Gustafson, who was shot 
down in the street, was struck by a glancing shot from 
some of the citizen's rifles, as they were out blazing 
away at this time.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Miller was then shot by a man named Stacy and 
his face filled full of bird shot. A man named Manning
killed Pitts' horse, and, as a matter of fact, the 
street was full of flying lead, coming from every direction.
It wasn't long before I was wounded in the 
thigh by Manning, and the next instant he shot Chadwell through the heart.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Dr. Wheeler, from an upper floor of a hotel, got a 
bead on Miller and brought him down, so that he soon 
lay dying in the middle of the street. Every time I 
saw a man pointing a gun at me I dropped off my 
horse and tried to drive the shooter under cover, but 
there were so many of them, and I couldn't see in 
<pb n="137" />
<pb n="138" />
<pb n="139" />
every direction, so I soon found out that, wounded as 
I was, I was helpless. Meanwhile there was a tragedy 
going on inside the bank.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/fingpri2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Reproduction of finger print system in vogue at the Minnesota state prison</head>
<figDesc>Reproduction of finger print system in vogue at the Minnesota state prison</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/fingpri1.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Reproduction of record from files of Minnesota State Prison, showing record of former inmate.</head>
<figDesc>Reproduction of record from files of Minnesota State Prison, showing record of former inmate.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q>Bob came out in a hurry and started down the 
street toward Manning, who ran into a store, hoping
he would get a shot at Bob from under cover. Bob
ran on, but didn't notice Dr. Wheeler, who was
upstairs in the hotel, behind him, and Wheeler's third 
shot smashed Bob's right arm. Bob switched his gun
to his left and got on Miller's horse, thinking that
Miller was dead. By this time Howard and Pitts had 
got out of the bank, and I told them that Miller was
still alive and we'd have to save him. I told Pitts to
put Miller on my horse, but when we lifted him I saw
he was dead, so I told Pitts that I would hold off the
crowd while he got away, as his horse had been killed.
While Pitts ran, less than ten yards, I stood stood with my
pistol pointed at anyone who showed his head, and
then I galloped off and overtook him and took him up
behind me.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Pitts then confessed to me about the drinking,
and said they had made an awful mess of it inside
the bank. It had been arranged that they should hold
up Joseph L. Heywood, the acting cashier, at his 
window, and after roping him get to the safe without any
trouble. Instead of that, these three drink-crazed
lunatics leaped over the rail and scared Heywood so
badly that he immediately got on the defensive, and in
a minute the alarm was out and it was all over.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>It seems that one of the robbers had waved his 
revolver at Heywood the minute he entered the bank
and asked him if he was the cashier. Heywood had
said he wasn't, and then the same question was put
<pb n="140" />
to the other two men who were in the bank. Each 
of the three said he was not the cashier, but the robber
turned to Heywood, who was sitting at the cashier's
desk, and said:</q>
</p>
<p>
<q> <q>You're the cashier; open that safe d&mdash;n quick or 
I'll blow your head off.</q></q>
</p>
<p>
 <q>Heywood jumped back and Pitts ran to the vault 
and got inside. Heywood then tried to shut him in, 
and was seized by the robbers, who told him to open 
the safe at once or he would not live another minute. 
Heywood told him there was a time lock on it that 
positively couldn't be opened, whereupon Howard 
pulled a knife and tried to cut Heywood's throat, the 
cashier having been thrown to the ground in the 
scuffle that had taken place. Incidentally, Pitts told 
me afterwards that Howard fired a pistol near Heywood's
head, but only with the intention of frightening him.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>A. E. Bunker, the teller, by this time had tried to 
get hold of a pistol that was near where he was, but 
Pitts got the gun first, and it was found on him after 
he was killed, and consequently furnished just that 
much good evidence that we were the men at Northfield.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The boys saw by this time that the safe could not 
be reached, so they asked Bunker about the money 
that was outside. Bunker pointed to a little tray full 
of small coins, and while Bob was putting them away 
in a sack Bunker made a dash through a rear window. Pitts
fired at him twice, the bullet going 
through his right shoulder.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/stpaulpo.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Group showing St. Paul police department, J.J. Connor, Chief.</head>
<figDesc>Group showing St. Paul police department, J.J. Connor, Chief.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/stpaulpo2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Group showing St. Paul police department, J.J. Connor, Chief.</head>
<figDesc>Group showing St. Paul police department, J.J. Connor, Chief.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q>By this time the men in the bank had heard the 
commotion and firing outside and started to leave. 
<pb n="141" />
<pb n="142" />
<pb n="143" />
Heywood, who had been on the floor, unfortunately 
rose at this instant, and Pitts, still under the influence 
of liquor, shot him through the head and killed him.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Meantime we who had escaped slaughter in the 
terrible bombardment we had faced were trying to 
make our way to some safe place. Not far from Northfield
we met a farmer, who lent us a horse for Pitts to 
ride, and we got past Dundas ahead of the news of 
the raid on the bank. We were also beating it at 
Millersburg, but at Shieldsville we ran into a squad of 
men who knew what had happened and were after us. 
These men had, foolishly for themselves, left their 
guns outside a house, and we didn't let them get hold 
of them until we had a good start, but they overtook 
us about four miles away and shots were exchanged 
without any trouble resulting.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Soon there were a thousand men on our trail and 
about &#36;5,000 in rewards for our capture. We tramped 
and camped and rode and watched in a strange country and among the lakes.
We didn't know the trails 
and were afraid to try the fords and bridges, knowing 
that our hunters would be sure to keep their eyes on 
these places. Saturday morning we abandoned our 
horses and decided to keep up the fight afoot. We 
tramped all night and put in Sunday near Marysburg. 
Bob's elbow by this time was in pretty bad shape and 
we had to go slow. Finally, on Monday night and 
Tuesday we couldn't go anywhere, so we passed the 
time in a deserted house near Mankato. A man named 
Dunning found us there and we took him prisoner. On 
the theory that the dead are silent, some of the men 
wanted to kill him, but I wouldn't stand for that, so 
we made him swear by all that was holy that he
<pb n="144" />
wouldn't tell that he had seen us until we got away. 
Then we turned him loose. He lost no time in getting
into Mankato and giving the alarm, and in a few 
minutes another posse was after us.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>That night Howard and Wood decided that they 
wouldn't hold back any longer and that we were losing 
valuable time because of Bob's wound, so they left 
us and went on west. They stole two horses very 
soon, and this helped us as well as them, for the posse 
followed the trail of the stolen horses, not knowing 
that we had divided.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>On Thursday morning, September 21, just two 
weeks after the raid, the end came. A party of forty 
men soon surrounded us and opened fire. We were 
cut off from our horses and our case was hopeless. We 
were on the open prairie and not ready for our last 
flight against such odds, we fell back into the Watonwan
river bottoms and hid in some bushes.</q>
</p>
<p>

<q>When the iron doors shut behind us at the Stillwater
prison we all submitted to the prison discipline 
with the same unquestioning obedience that I had
exacted during my military service. The result was that 
we gained friends both in prison and outside. We 
had been in prison a little over seven years, when, on 
January 25, 1884, the main building was destroyed by 
fire at night. George F. Dodd was then connected 
with the prison, while his wife was matron. There 
was danger of a panic and a terrible disaster. Dodd 
released Jim and Bob and myself. To me he gave a 
revolver. Jim had an axe handle and Bob a small 
iron bar. We stood guard over the women prisoners, 
marched them from the danger of the fire, and the 
prison authorities were kind enough to say that had 
<pb n="145" />
<pb n="146" />
it not been for us there must have been a tremendous 
loss of life.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/mplscops.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Head Officials, Minneapolis, Minnesota Police Department. 1. Capt. H.L. Getchell, 5th Precinct. 2. Capt. P.J. Quealey, 2nd Precinct. 3. Capt. Michael Mealey, Asst. Supt. Hdqrtrs. 4. Capt. Frank T. Corriston, Superintendant. 5. Capt. Nicholas Smith, Capt. of Detectives. 6. Capt. Geo. Reviere, Night Capt. Hdqtrs. 7. Capt. Frank Ferm, 3rd Precinct. 8. Capt. Geo. Sinclair, 4th Precinct.</head>
<figDesc>Head Officials, Minneapolis, Minnesota Police Department.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q>I can say without fear of contradiction that had it 
been in our minds to do so we could have escaped 
from the prison that night, but we had determined to 
pay the penalty that had been exacted, and if we were 
ever to return to liberty it would be with the consent 
and approval of the authorities and the public. A little
later Jim was put in charge of the mail and library 
of the prison, while I was made head nurse in the 
hospital, where I remained until the day we were 
paroled.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>As the years went by the popular feeling against 
us not only subsided, but our absolute obedience to the 
minutest detail of the prison discipline won us the 
consideration, and I might even say, the esteem of 
the prison officials. In the meantime it had been a 
life sentence for Bob, he having died of consumption 
September 16, 1889.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Jim and I went out into the world July 14, 1901, 
after serving a few months less than twenty-five years. 
Each of us immediately found work, and life again 
took on its normal hues. Poor Jim, however, was subject
to periodical spells of deep depression. The bullet 
that shattered his upper jaw in our last fight in 
Madelia imbedded itself near the brain and was not 
removed until long after we were in the prison at 
Stillwater. That bullet was the cause of his occasional
gloominess. After our relase from prison Jim's 
health continued precarious. He finally gave up the 
fight, and on October 19, 1902, took his own life in a 
hotel in Minnesota.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>I am not exactly a dead man, but I have been shot 
<pb n="147" />
twenty-eight times and am now carrying in my body 
fourteen bullets that physicians have been unable to 
extract. Twelve of these wounds I received while 
wearing the gray, and I have ever been proud of 
them, and it has been one of my keenest regrets that 
I did not receive the rest of them during the war with 
Spain.</q> 
</p>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 30%" />
<p>
The following is an authentic copy of 
Younger's commitment papers.
</p>
<div>
<div>
<head>THOMAS COLEMAN YOUNGER.</head>
<head type="sub">RICE COUNTY DISTRICT COURT.</head>
<table>
<row><cell>Crime</cell><cell>Murder 1" deg.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Term Life.</cell><cell> Sentenced Nov. 20th, 1876. </cell></row>
<row><cell>Nativity</cell><cell> Missouri. </cell></row>
<row><cell>Age </cell><cell>32 years. </cell></row>
<row><cell>Height</cell><cell> 5'&mdash;11&frac14;"</cell></row>
<row><cell>Hair </cell><cell> Very light brown, very curly, thin, and bald on crown of 
head. </cell></row>
<row><cell>Eyes</cell><cell> Blue (light). </cell></row>
<row><cell>Complexion </cell><cell>Fair, inclined to be florid. </cell></row>
<row><cell>Occupation </cell><cell>None. </cell></row>
<row><cell>Marks </cell><cell> Two moles on back&mdash;Scar on left shoulder and small
scar on left hip caused by gunshot.</cell></row>
</table>
<p>Can read and write&mdash;uses tobacco&mdash;single&mdash;temperate.
</p>

</div>




<div>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 30%" />
<head type="sub">RECORD</head>
<p>
Removed to Washington County Jail, Jan. 26, 1884. 
</p>
<p>
Paroled July 14, 1901. 
</p>
<p>
Pardoned Feb. 4, 1903, on condition that he leave 
State of Minnesota and that he never exhibit himself in public in any way. 
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<pb n="148" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>THE STATE BOARD OF PARDONS</head>
<p>
The members of the State Board of Pardons, next to 
the weather man, are the most severely criticised in the 
state of Minnesota, and unjustly so. In the exercise of 
the authority conferred upon them the Minnesota State 
Board of Pardons is the most conservative in the United 
States. Notwithstanding the fact that they grant about 
seventy-five per cent less pardons than similar bodies in 
other states, the press, in many instances, holds that it is 
too liberal in its disposition of mercy. 
</p>
<p>
The true function of the Pardon Board has often been 
exemplified by the daily press of the twin cities, and they 
appear to be unanimous in the belief that where the interest
of humanity or reform can be benefited it is proper 
for the board to lighten a penalty or grant an outright 
rpardon. 
</p>
<p>
Jesus of Nazareth enunciated the wise doctrine that 
<q>if you wish to be forgiven, you must forgive others,</q> 
and this apothegm is the alpha and omega of the Christian
religion to day. <q>Go and sin no more</q> is often the 
basic principal of true reformation. 
</p>

<figure url="images/pardonbd.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Pardon Board of the State of Minnesota</head>
<figDesc>Pardon Board of the State of Minnesota</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/govoffce.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Governor's private office in State Capitol, St. Paul, Minn.  Pardon Board hold their meetings here.</head>
<figDesc>Governor's private office in State Capitol, St. Paul, Minn.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/govrecrm.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Governor's reception room, State Capitol, St. Paul, Minn.</head>
<figDesc>Governor's reception room, State Capitol, St. Paul, Minn.</figDesc>
</figure>


<p>
The laws of man ever since the days of Moses, Confucius,
Lycurgus, Solon and Christ are intended to be just
and impartial to all men; but no law yet created by our 
wise jurists and statesmen can eradicate from the
individual the brand of Cain placed upon him by society,&mdash;that
of an ex-convict. The Pardon Board can enlarge a 
man's liberty by making him a free citizen and a tax-payer, but it cannot free
his conscience from the stigma 
of disgrace that clings to him until the portals of eternity 
open to receive him. We believe that the pardoning 
<pb n="149" />
<pb n="150" />
<pb n="151" />
power, judicially applied, is the greatest aid to true reformation yet discovered. 
</p>
<p>
The Minnesota State Board of Pardons consists of the 
Governor, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the 
Attorney General. Its meetings are held quarterly in 
the state capitol building, and they meet on the second 
Monday in January, April, July and October. 
</p>
<p>
The law governing the granting of pardons is as follows:
<q>Such board may grant an absolute or a conditional pardon, but
every conditional pardon shall state 
the terms and conditions on which it was granted. A 
reprieve in a case where capital punishment has been 
imposed may be granted by any member of the board, 
but for such time only as may be reasonably necessary to 
secure a meeting for the consideration of an application 
for pardon or commutation of sentence. Every pardon 
or communication of sentence shall be in writing and 
shall have no force or effect unless granted by a unanimous
vote of the board duly convened.</q> 
</p>
<p>
A convict in the prison Mirror writes as follows: 
</p>
<p>
<q>Exercising clemency toward convicted persons is a 
subject that arouses many editorial writers. These 
newspaper men are creators of public opinion, and it 
would seem possible for them to calmly, impartially
consider the subject instead of disseminating personal ideas 
immature in reasoning and founded on the erroneous
conception that every person in prison has received a fair, 
impartial trial and that the sentences must be warranted 
upon the trial court's proceedings. In fact, the majority
of editorial writers should refrain from casting reflections
upon the pardon power because it seems too 
lenient or applaud it for refusing leniency toward
prisoners. Their attitude shows plainly a lack of discernable 
<pb n="152" />
ability. Few prisoners appeal to the pardon power of 
a state for clemency. Clemency is a term used for pity. 
Prisoners, as a rule, detest being considered seekers after 
pity. This is the concealed idea of many editorials, and 
thereby erroneous. The prisoner appeals to the pardon 
power because it is a lawfully created power to entertain 
his appeal, which is based upon his opinions concerning 
the justice of a sentence as opposed to the injustice of 
the trial court's imposed sentence. The appellant is not 
after pity, but expects justice. He has a right to the 
benefits of the law, and has a right, not only to ask for, 
but to demand justice. And no class of persons should 
exploit these facts more than editorial writers. Today 
they are greatly responsible for the necessity of wives, 
children and mothers practically begging for pity for 
some loved one in prison. We need Websters to interpret
the law and demand justice for clients&mdash;not wives, 
mothers and friends to beg for pity.</q> 
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>PATHETIC INCIDENTS AT MEETINGS OF PARDON BOARD.</head>
<p>
<q>My little girl Virginia, only four years old, has 
been praying to Santa Claus every night for the past 
week, instead of to God. She has asked Santa every 
night to give her her papa for Christmas.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>It seems all a dream, and I am afraid that I will 
awake to find it isn't true. But I felt all day that the 
pardon would come. I don't know why it was, but I 
caught myself singing this morning as I went about 
the house. It is the happiest day of my life. It will 
be the happiest Christmas that my family has ever 
spent.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Fred doesn't know that the pardon board meets 
<pb n="153" />
today. He expects that it will meet Thursday. I am 
going to take the pardon with me to the prison, present
it to Warden Wolfer and take my husband home 
with me.</q> 
</p>
<p>
It is a young woman, the wife of a chief of police 
convicted of grafting, pleading before the pardon board 
for his release. She has worked a year securing evidence.
It is just two days before Christmas and the 
board is called for a special session. The governor, 
the chief justice of the supreme court and the attorney 
general, who constitute the pardon board, hear her 
case with tears in their eyes. Attorneys and others 
plead for him also. Then the board goes into session. 
They decide that seventeen months in prison has 
served the ends of justice. They summon the young 
wife. 
</p>
<p>
<q>Your husband has been granted a full pardon,</q> 
announces one of the members.
</p>
<p>
<q>May he come home with me now?</q> she asks, faltering,
then she swoons. Soon she recovers. The 
pardon is signed. She takes it with her to Stillwater, 
presents it to the warden and a moment later husband 
and wife are in each other's arms. Merry Christmas 
it was for them.
</p>
<p>
<q>He's all I've got, judge. I'll take him anywhere, 
or I'll keep him right at home in Minneapolis, if you 
will only let him out. I want to take care of him, for 
he'll die if he stays there.</q> Tears drop from the mother
of a youth of twenty-two who has been sent to
prison for twelve years for larceny. <q>I've saved &#36;250 
in the last five years, and me doing day work,</q> she 
says proudly. Her son is suffering from tuberculosis. 
The board believes that it is better for him to be under 
<pb n="154" />
such a mother's care than die in the prison and he is 
released.
</p>
<p>
Nowhere else, unless it be at a hospital, must one 
gaze at such a seemingly unending sad procession of 
pain-torn hearts, the anguished souls of mothers, fathers,
sisters, sweethearts and wives, than at the meeting 
of the pardon board every three months. Nowhere else 
are the grinding knives of the law more apparent. Few 
are as fortunate as the two cited above. Of the two 
or three dozen cases at each meeting, seldom are more 
than two or three persons shown any mercy. 
</p>
<p>
Here is the case of a murderer sentenced to hang. 
An attorney pleads for him; points out that the evidence
was doubtful, says that the spirit of vengeance 
guided the jury. But the board has the evidence before
it. <q>It clearly shows that the crime was premeditated,</q>
remarks one member. There is no hope. 
</p>
<p>
A sweet faced girl who has journeyed all the way 
from Seattle to take her brother back with her, finds 
that the law could not pardon an offender because his 
sister believes in him and loves him. The board must 
be shown that the punishment was too severe for the 
crime or that life at home will serve better to make 
the offender a useful citizen than doing penance at the 
prison. 
</p>
<p>
To an aged father and mother of a boy serving a 
thirty-month sentence for stealing &#36;56 worth of grain, 
the sad news is meted out that their son must serve out 
his sentence. They had trusted with the blind faith that 
the board would release him because they needed him. 
<q>The farm is running down and Charlie ought to be 
home to help care for things. He had always been a 
good boy,</q> they said. 
</p>
<pb n="155" />
<p>
Scathing lectures are often given those asking pardon
for the undeserving, by the members of the board. 
<q>Do you think fifteen months is too much for a man 
who shot his wife? It was not his fault she did not 
die,</q> the chief justice recently told some friends of a 
man who had hunted up and shot a wife who had left 
him. <q>If my sister were outraged by a man, shooting 
would be none too good for him,</q> the governor recently
told a smooth-tongued attorney who was making a 
plea for a man serving a long sentence for a heinous 
crime. 
</p>
<p>
So it goes. There is mercy for a few; there is 
the stern and unrelenting law tor the many. 
</p>

<figure url="images/decop135.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<figDesc>decoration, smoking gun</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>PRESS NOTICES.</head>


<div>
<head type="sub">MORE LIGHT.</head>
<pb n="156" />
<p>
Mr. Heilbron's book on Convict Life at the Minnesota State 
Prison should obtain a wide circulation. The world outside 
regards the world inside much as it would regard another planet, 
and is curious accordingly. As a general rule, the <q>heroes</q> of 
this work of art are saying nothing and spinning twine and 
when they get back to Civilization they keep up the habit. While 
apt to examine books of this kind in a decidedly critical light, 
the heroes aforesaid will find in this one no misstatements of 
fact and no flights of fancy. The illustrations too are excellent, 
the one of No. 1055's back being a speaking likeness. Another 
first-class picture is the one which reproduces the magnificent 
polish on Mr. Nelson's counter in the tailor shop. The bindery, 
too, that smoothly running one-man department, has quite a 
palatial appearance. The <q>chiel amang us takin'</q> flashlights is 
to be congratulated. It may be doubted whether a copy of this 
little book will hereafter be found in every home in the state, 
but it would not do any harm. Maybe when Horace was hesitating
about signing papa's name in papa's checkbook, the family
copy would strike his eye and induce him to&mdash;go ahead?&mdash;
</p>
<signed>
(Prison Mirror, July 29, 1909.) 
</signed>
</div>

<div>
<head>A NOVEL VOLUME.</head>
<p>
<q>Convict Life at the Minnesota State Prison</q> Published by Mr. 
W. C. Heilbron of St. Paul. 
</p>
<p>
<q>Convict Life at the Minnesota State Prison,</q> of which Mr. 
W. C. Heilbron, assistant public examiner, St. Paul, is the 
author and publisher, is a neat volume, replete with halftone 
illustrations of scenes, views and incidents of this institution, 
occupying 134 pages of text, including pictures. 
</p>
<p>
The frontispiece is a remarkably good likeness of Hon. 
Henry Wolfer, the warden, under whose guidance during the 
past eighteen years the Minnesota State Prison has made its 
remarkable penological and financial success. 
</p>
<p>
To one unacquainted with the modus operandi of dealing 
with prisoners in a penitentiary, <q>Convict Life at the Minnesota 
State Prison</q> affords an accurate and sustained story from start 
to finish. In this book is given a detailed description of the
reception of the prisoner, the manner in which he is handled, 
<pb n="157" />
clothed, fed, assigned to duty and governed by the resident
officials, with excellent sidelights upon the situation. 
</p>
<p>
The illustrations are numerous and give interior views of 
buildings, shops, departments and hospital, together with interesting
scenes of parades, drills and other matters of moment to 
the reader. 
</p>
<p>
Citizens&mdash;even those who have visited penal institutions&mdash;obtain
but a very scant conception of the method and manner 
in which they are conducted by a casual observance upon the 
occasion of a visit. <q>Convict Life at the Minnesota State 
Prison,</q> however, is written so that all may gain a proper conception
by reading it, and the illustrations materially aid in that 
respect. This book will be the means of doing a great deal of 
good in removing false notions regarding inmates and it ought 
to enjoy a large sale.&mdash;(Prison Mirror, July 22, 1909.) 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head>EDITORIAL.</head>
<p>
On the first page of this issue of The Mirror will be found a 
brief review of the volume entitled <q>Convict Life at the Minnesota
State Prison.</q> Until recently the publication of matter of 
that character has been tabooed by managers of penal institutions.
However, there is no harm in such publicity. Conditions 
are constantly improving and penologists recognize that fact. 
Corporal punishment and the lockstep have been abolished in 
many prisons. 
</p>
<p>
The problem confronting wardens is not <q>how to punish 
prisoners,</q> but rather how to reform them and restore them to 
society as good citizens. 
</p>
<p>
The Minnesota State Prison is referred to as a model, and, 
while the buildings now occupied are old and antiquated, 
unfit for prison purposes and manufacturing, nevertheless 
the morale of the inmates is of a high grade and credit 
is due to those who have brought this condition about. As the 
author, Mr. W. C. Heilbron, truly states, the first two months 
of incarceration for the average prisoners provide punishment 
enough to last a lifetime. Of course this does not apply to all 
inmates, but it is certainly true of many of them. 
</p>
<p>
It is neither the purpose nor the province of The Mirror 
to laud any one in particular regarding the management of the 
Minnesota State Prison. The facts speak more eloquently than 
all the eulogies that could be uttered. The Mirror, however, 
desires to direct the attention of the public to the fact that no 
harm is done by the publication of such a volume as <q>Convict 
Life at the Minnesota State Prison,</q> and much good may result 
from its compilation and circulation. 
</p>
<pb n="158" />
<p>
There have been prisons and dungeons since the earliest days 
of recorded history and no doubt such institutions will be in 
vogue until the end of the universe. Great advancement has 
been made in the treatment of those who have been so unfortunate
as to be segregated from society in general and the publication 
of facts instead of fancy will be the means of clarifying the 
atmosphere considerably as to what is just and humane and of 
the greatest earthly benefit to men and women who have, either 
through ignorance, accident, design or viciousness, fallen from 
grace and become the wards of the commonwealth in a prison 
or penitentiary. 
</p>
<p>
To the end that the public may be fully and reliably informed
of the facts in relation to prison life the volume mentioned
must prove to be of great value to all those who peruse 
its pages with an open mind and a generous heart&mdash;(Prison 
Mirror, July 22, 1909.) 
</p>

<figure url="images/twinebal.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w30">
<figDesc>decoration, twine ball</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<figure url="images/statefar.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<figDesc>Minnesota State Fair advertisement</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/newpriso.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<head>Minnesota's New $2,250,000 State Prison Now in Course of Construction</head>
<figDesc>Minnesota's New $2,250,000 State Prison Now in Course of Construction</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

</body>

<back>

<div id="footnotes">
<divGen type="footnotes"/>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>
</back>

</text>
</TEI.2>

